Welcome to the Huberman Lab podcast where we discuss science and science-based tools for everyday life. I'm Andrew Huberman and I'm a professor of neurobiology and ophthalmology at Stanford School of Medicine. Today my guest is Mark Andreessen. Mark Andreessen is a software engineer and an investor in technology companies. He co-founded and developed Mosaic, which was one of the first widely used web browsers. He also co-founded and developed Netscape, which was one of the earliest widespread used web browsers. And he co-founded and is a general partner at Andreessen Horowitz, one of the most successful Silicon Valley venture capital firms. All of that is to say that Mark Andreessen is one of the most successful innovators and investors ever. I was extremely excited to record this episode with Mark for several reasons. First of all, he himself is an incredible innovator. Second of all, he is an uncanny ability to spot the innovators of the future. And third, Mark has shown over and over again the ability to understand how technologies not yet even developed are going to impact the way that humans interact at large. Our conversation starts off by discussing what makes for an exceptional innovator, as well as what sorts of environmental conditions make for exceptional innovation and creativity more generally. In that context, we talk about risk-taking, not just in terms of risk-taking in one's profession, but about how some people, not all, but how some people who are risk-takers and innovators in the context of their work, also seem to take a lot of risks in their personal life and some of the consequences that can bring. Then we discuss some of the most transformative technologies that are now emerging, such as novel approaches to developing clean energy, as well as AI or artificial intelligence. With respect to AI, Mark shares his views as to why AI is likely to greatly improve human experience. And we discuss the multiple roles that AI is very likely to have in all of our lives in the near future. Mark explains how not too long from now, all of us are very likely to have AI assistance. For instance, assistance that give us highly informed health advice, highly informed psychological advice. Indeed, it is very likely that all of us will soon have AI assistance that govern most, if not all, of our daily decisions. And Mark explains how, if done correctly, this can be a tremendously positive addition to our life. In doing so, Mark provides a stark counter-argument for those that argue that AI is going to diminish human experience. So if you're hearing about and or concerned about the ways that AI is likely to destroy us, today you are going to hear about the many different ways that AI technologies now in development are likely to enhance our human experience at every level. What you'll soon find is that while today's discussion does center around technology and technology development, it is really a discussion about human beings and human psychology. So whether you have an interest in technology development and or AI, I'm certain that you'll find today's discussion to be an important, and highly lucid view into what will soon be the future that we all live in. Before we begin, I'd like to emphasize that this podcast is separate from my teaching and research roles at Stanford. It is however part of my desire and effort to bring zero cost to consumer information about science and science-related tools to the general public. In keeping with that theme, I'd like to thank the sponsors of today's podcast. Our first sponsor is Element. Element is an electrolyte drink that has everything you need and nothing you don't. That means plenty of the electrolytes, sodium, magnesium, and potassium in the correct ratios, but no sugar. The electrolytes and hydration are absolutely key for mental health, physical health, and performance. Even a slight degree of dehydration can impair our ability to think, our energy levels, and our physical performance. Element makes it very easy to achieve proper hydration, and it does so by including the three electrolytes in the exact ratios they need to be present. I drink Element first thing in the morning when I wake up. I usually mix it with about 16 to 32 ounces of water. If I'm exercising, I'll drink one while I'm exercising, and I tend to drink one after exercising as well. Many people are scared off by the idea of ingesting sodium because obviously we don't want to consume sodium in excess. However, for people that have normal blood pressure, and especially for people that are consuming very clean diets, that is consuming not so many processed foods or highly processed foods. Oftentimes, we are not getting enough sodium, magnesium, and potassium, and we can suffer as a consequence. And with Element, simply by mixing in water, it tastes delicious, it's very easy to get that proper hydration. If you'd like to try Element, you can go to drinkelement. That's element.com slash huberman to claim a free Element Sample Pack with your purchase. Again, that's drinkelement.com slash huberman. Today's episode is also brought to us by 8Sleep. 8Sleep makes smart mattress covers with cooling, heating, and sleep tracking capacity. I've spoken many times before in this podcast about the fact that sleep, that is getting a great night sleep, is the foundation of all mental health, physical health, and performance. When we're sleeping well, everything goes far better when we are not sleeping well, when enough, everything gets far worse at the level of mental health, physical health, and performance. And one of the key things to getting a great night sleep and waking up feeling refreshed is that you have to control the temperature of your sleeping environment. And that's because in order to fall and stay deeply asleep, you need your core body temperature to drop by about 1 to 3 degrees. And in order to wake up feeling refreshed and energized, you want your core body temperature to increase by about 1 to 3 degrees. With 8Sleep, it's very easy to induce that drop in core body temperature by cooling your mattress early and throughout the night and warming your mattress toward morning. I started sleeping on an 8Sleep mattress cover a few years ago, and it has completely transformed the quality of the sleep that I get. So much so that I actually load traveling because I don't have my 8Sleep mattress cover when I travel. If you'd like to try 8Sleep, you can go to 8Sleep.com slash Huberman, and you'll save up to $150 off their pod 3 cover. 8Sleep currently ships in the USA, Canada, UK, select countries in the EU, and Australia. Again, that's 8Sleep.com slash Huberman. And now for my discussion with Mark Andreessen. Mark, welcome. Hey, thank you. Delighted to have you here and have so many questions for you about innovation, AI, your view of the landscape of tech and humanity in general. I want to start off by talking about innovation from three different perspectives. There's the inner game, so to speak, or the psychology of the innovator or innovators. Things like their propensity for engaging in conflict or not, their propensity for having a dream or a vision. And in particular, their innovation as it relates to some psychological trait or expression. So we'll get to that in a moment. The second component that I'm curious about is the outer landscape around innovators, who they place themselves with. The sorts of choices that they make. And also the sorts of personal relationships that they might have or not have. And then the last component is this notion of the larger landscape that they happen to find themselves in. What time in history? What's the geography, Bay Area, New York, Dubai, etc. So to start off, is there a common trait of innovators that you think is absolutely essential as a seed to creating things that are really impactful? Yeah. So I'm not a psychologist, but I've picked up some of the concepts on some of the terms. And so it's a great moment of delight in my life when I learned about the big five personality traits. I was like, aha, there's a way to actually describe the answer to this question in at least reasonably scientific terms. And so I think what you're looking for when you're talking about real innovators, like people who actually do really create a breakthrough work. I think you're talking about a couple things. So one is very high and what's called trait openness, which is one of the big one of the big five, which is basically just like flat out open and new ideas. And of course, the nature of trait openness is trait openness means you're not just open to new ideas in one category. You're open to many different kinds of new ideas. And so we might talk about the fact that a lot of innovators also are very creative people in other aspects of their lives, right, even outside of their specific creative domain. So that's important. But of course, just being open is not sufficient because if you're just open, you could just be curious and explore, right, and spend your entire life reading and doing, you know, talking to people and never actually create something. So you also need a couple of their things. You need a high level of conscientiousness, which is another one of the big five. You need somebody who's really willing to apply themselves in our world, typically over a period of many years, right, to be able to accomplish something great. You know, they typically work very hard. That often gets obscure because the stories they're getting told about these people are, you know, it's just like there's this kid and he just had this idea and it was like a stroke of genius. And it was like a moment in time and you know, it's just like, oh, he was so lucky. And it's like, no, like for most of these people, it's years and years and years of applied effort. And so you need somebody with like an extreme, you know, basic willingness to defer gratification and really apply themselves to a specific thing for a long time. And of course, this is why there aren't very many of these people. There aren't many people who are high in openness and high and conscientiousness because to a certain extent, they're opposed, right, traits. And so you need somebody with both of those. Third is you need somebody high in disagreeableness, which is the third of the big five. So you need somebody who's just like basically ornery, right, because if they're not ornery, then they'll be talked out of their ideas by people who will be like, oh, well, you know, because the reaction most people have new ideas is, oh, that's dumb. And so somebody who's too agreeable will be easily dissuaded to not pursue, you know, not pulling the thread anymore. So you need somebody highly disagreeable. Again, the nature of disagreeableness is they tend to be disagreeable, disagreeable about everything. So they tend to be these very, it's kind of like kind of classic, you know, kind of renegade characters. And then there's just a table stakes component, which is they just also need to be high IQ. They just, they just need to be really smart, because it's just it's hard to innovate in any category if you can't set the size large amounts of information quickly. And so those are four, like basically, like high spikes, you know, very rare traits that basically have to have to come together. You could probably also say they probably at some point need to be relatively low in neuroticism, which is another big five because if they're true neurotic, they probably can't handle the stress, right. So it's kind of this, this dial in there. And then of course, if you're, if you're into like this, the sort of science of the big five basically, you know, these are all people who are on like the far outlying kind of point on the normal distribution across all these traits. And then that just gets you to I think the sort of hardest topic of all around this, this whole concept, which is just there are very few of these people. Do you think they're born with these traits? Yeah, well, so they're born with the traits. And then of course, the traits are not, you know, United States are not destiny. And so the traits are not deterministic in the sense of that, you know, just because they have those personality traits doesn't mean they're they're going to deliver great creativity. But like they need to have those properties, because otherwise they're just not either going to be able to do the work or they're not going to enjoy it. Right. Or I mean, look, a lot of these people are highly capable, competent people, you know, it's very easy for them to get like high paying jobs in traditional institutions and you know, get lots of, you know, traditional words and, you know, end up with big paychecks and, you know, there's a lot of people that, you know, big institutions that we, you know, you and I know well, and I deal with many of these where people get paid a lot of money and they get a lot of respect and they go for 20 years and it's great and they never create anything new. Right. And so there's a lot of administrators. A lot of them, yeah, a lot of other men up in administrative jobs. And that's fine. That's good. The world needs, you know, the world needs that also right the innovators can't run everything because everything, you know, the rate of change would be too high society, I think probably wouldn't be able to handle it. So you need some people who are on the other side who are going to kind of keep the lights on and keep things running. But there is this decision that people have to make, which is okay, if I have the sort of latent capabilities to do this is this actually what I want to spend my life doing. I want to go through the stress and the pain of the trauma, right, and the anxiety, right, and the risk of failure, right. And so do I really want to once in a while you're running to somebody who's just like can't do it any other way, like they just have to who's an example of that. He wants the, you know, the paramount example of our time. And I bring him up in part because he's such an obvious example, but in part because he's talked about this in interviews where he basically says like he's like I can't turn it off like. Yes, come I have to pursue them right. It's why he's like running type companies at the same time and like working on a sixth right. It's just like he can't he can't turn it off. You know, look, there's a lot of other people who are probably have the capabilities to do it who ended up talking themselves into or, you know, whatever events conspired to put them in a position where they did something else. You know, obviously there are people who try to be creative who just don't have the capability. And so there's some bend diagram there of determinism through traits, but also choices in life. And then also, of course, the situation in which they're born, the context within which they grow up culture, right, what their parents expect of them and so forth. And so you have to, you know, you kind of get all the way through this. You have to thread all these all these natals kind of at the same time. Do you think there are folks out there that meet these criteria who are disagreeable, but that can feign agreeableness. You know, they can for those just listening, March has raised his right hand. In other words, that they can sort of phrase that comes to mind, maybe because I can relate to a little bit, they sneak up through the system, meaning they behave ethically as it relates to the requirements of the system. And so, you know, they're not breaking laws or breaking rules. In fact, quite the opposite there, paying attention to the rules and following the rules until they get to a place where being disagreeable feels less threatening to their overall sense of security. Yeah, we look to really highly competent people don't have to break laws, right, like it's it's the there was this there was this there was this myth, you know, that's what happened around the movie The Godfather and then there was this character, my real asky, you know, who's like ran basically to mafia, you know, 50, 60, 70 years ago, and there was this great line of like well, my last year, only like applied himself to run a general motorcy would have been the best CEO of all time. It's like no, not really, right, like the people who are like greater running big companies, they don't have to they don't have to be mob losses, they don't have to like break laws, they can, you know, they can they can work it's their smart and sophisticated enough to be able to work inside the system. You know, they don't need to take the easy out so I don't think there's any implication that they have to, you know, that they have to have to break laws that said they have to bring norms. Right, and and it's specifically the thing this is probably the thing that gets missed the most because the process of the process of innovating the process of creating something new like once it works like the stories get right. And as they say in comic books, so the stories get adapted to where it's like it was inevitable all along, you know, everybody always knew that this was a good idea, you know, the person has won all these awards society embrace them. And if you invariably if you if you were with them when that was when they were actually doing the work or if you actually get a couple drinks into them and talking about it, they're like no, that's not how it happened at all. It's a wall of skepticism, just like a wall of basically social, you know, essentially denial, no, this is not going to work. No, I'm not going to join your lab. No, I'm not going to come work for your company. No, I'm not going to buy your product, right? No, I'm not going to meet with you. And so they they they get just like tremendous social resistance. So they're they're not getting positive feedback from their from from their social network the way that more agreeable people need to have right. This is why agreeable. This is a problem for innovation. If you're agreeable, you're going to listen to people around you. They're going to tell you that new ideas are stupid right end of story. You're not going to proceed. And so I would put it more on like they need to be able to deal with then you'd be able to deal with social discomfort to the level of ostracism or at some point they're going to get shaken out and they're just going to quit. Do you think that people that meet these criteria do best by banding with others that meet these criteria early or is it important that they form this deep sense of self? Like the ability to cry oneself to sleep at night or you know line the fetal position, worrying that things aren't going to work out and then still get up the next morning and get right back out there. Right. So Sean Parker has the best line by the way on on on this he says, you know, being an entrepreneur, being a creator is like getting pushed the face like over and over again. He said eventually you start to like the taste of your own blood. And I love that line because it makes everybody like massively uncomfortable right but it gives you a sense of like how basically painful the process is you talk to any entrepreneur, you know, who's been through it about that they're like, oh yeah, that's exactly what it's like. So so there is this there is a big individual component to it but look, it can be very lonely right. And especially you know very hard I think to do this if if nobody around you is trying to do anything you're more similar right and if you're getting just universally negative responses like I you know very few people I think it very few people have an ego strength to be able to survive that for years. So I do think there's a huge advantage and this is why you do you do see clusters there's a huge advantage to clustering right and so you have and you know throughout history you've had this clustering effect right you had you know clustering of the great artists and sculptors and Renaissance Florence you know you have the clustering of the philosophers agrees you have the clustering of tech people in Silicon Valley you have the clustering of creative you know arts movie TV people in Los Angeles. Right and so forth and so on you know for you know there's always a scene right there's there's always there's always like a nexus and a place where people come together you know for for these kinds of things. So generally speaking like if somebody wants to work in tech and in tech they're going to be much better off being around a lot of people who are trying to do that kind of thing them they are in a place where nobody else is doing it. Having said that the clustering has it can have downsides it can have side effects and you put any group of people together and you do start to get group think even among people who are individually very disagreeable and so these same clusters where you get these very idiosyncratic people they do have fads and trends just like every place else right and so they get they get they get wrapped up in their own social dynamics. And the good news is the social dynamic in those places is usually very forward looking right and so it's usually it's usually like you know it's like a herd of iconic class looking for the next big thing right so iconic class looking for the next big thing that's good the herd part right that's you got to be careful of so even when you're in one of these environments you have to be careful that you're not getting sucked into the group think too much. When you say group think to mean excessive friction due to pressure testing each other's ideas to the point where things just don't move forward or you're talking about group think where people start to form a consensus or the self belief that gosh we are so strong because we are so different. What can we better define group think it's actually less either one of those things both happen those are good those are good the part of group think i'm talking about is just like we all we all basically zero in. We just end up zeroing on the same ideas right in Hollywood there's this classic thing it's like and you know there there are years where there's like a lot of volcano movies. It's like where there are these volcano movies and it's just like I don't there was just something in the just all right there was just something in the air you know look tack just so can Valley has this you know there are moments in time where you'll have these but it's like. The old thing like what's the difference in a fat in the trend right you know fat fat is the trend that doesn't last right and so you know so like a valley is subject to fads and both fads and trends just like anyplace else. Right in other words you take smart disagreeable people you close with me together they will act like a herd right they will end up thinking the same things unless they try very hard not to. You've talked about these personality traits of great innovators before and we're talking about them now. You invest in innovators you try and identify them and you are one so you can recognize these traits here i'm making the presumption that you have these traits indeed you do i'll just get that out of the way. Have you observed people trying to feign these traits and are there any specific questions or behaviors that are give away that they're pretending to be the young steep jobs or that they're pretending to be the young Henry Ford. Pick your list of other other names that qualify as authentic legitimate innovators we won't name names of people have tried to disguise themselves as true innovators but what are some of the. The litmus tests and I realize here that we don't want you to give these away to the point where they're lose their potency but if you could share a few of those. Yeah, it's good we're actually pretty open book on this so so yeah so so first of all yes so there are people who definitely try to like him and basically present as being something that they're not and they you know like they've read all the books they will listen to this interview right they they won't they you know they study everything and they they construct a facade and they come in and present it something they're not. I would say the amount of that varies exactly correlated to the NASDAQ. Right and so when stock prices are super low like you actually get the opposite what's that price is super low people get to demolized and people who should be doing it basically give up because they just think that whatever whatever with the industry is over the trend is over whatever it's all hopeless and so you get this flushing things and nobody ever shows up at a stock market low right and says like I'm the new I'm the new and the new next big thing and and and and doesn't really want to do it because because they're higher status the kinds of people who do the thing that you're talking about they're they're fundamentally oriented for social status there's a lot of things that are not as good as they are and they're not going to be a lot of things that are not going to be a lot of things. They're trying they're trying to get the social status without actually without actually the substance and there are always other places to go get social status. So so after 2000 the joke was so you know when I got to Silicon Valley at 93 94 the valley was dead we talk about that by 98 it was worrying and you had a lot of these people showing up who were you basically had a lot of a lot of people showing up with what's the kind of stories 2000 market crash by 2001 the joke was that there were these terms B to C and B to B. And in 1998 they met B to C meant business to consumer and B to B meant business to business which is two different kinds of business models for internet companies by 2001 B to B to B meant back to banking and B to C meant back to consulting right which is the high status people who people oriented to status who showed up to be in tech were like yeah screw it like this is over stick a fork in it I'm going to go back to or you know Goldman Sachs or go back to McKinsey you know where I can where I can be high status and so you you get this flushing kind of effect that happens in a downturn. That said on a on in a big upswing yeah you get you get a lot of you get a lot of people showing up with with a lot of you know with a lot of you know kind of let's say public persona without the substance to back it up. So the way we stress that we can actually say exactly how we test for this which because it's the test exactly addresses the issue in a way that is impossible to fake. And it's actually this it's actually the same way homicide detectives trying to find out if you if you're if you're actually like if you're in a center whether you killed somebody it's the same it's the same tactic which is you you ask increasingly detailed questions right and so you know the way a homicide cop does this is you know what were you doing last night you know oh I was at a movie which movie you know without it which theater you know okay which see did you sit in you know okay what was the end of the movie right like right and you you ask increasingly detailed questions in people. At some point people have trouble making up and things just fuzz into just kind of obvious bullshit and basically fake founders basically have the same problem they have a they're able to really a conceptual theory of what they're doing that they've kind of engineered but as they get into the details it just it just fuses out whereas the the true people that you want to back that can do it basically what you find is they've spent five or 10 or 20 years obsessing on the details of whatever it is there about to do and they're so deep in the details that they know so much more about it than you ever will. And in fact the best possible reaction is when they get mad right which is also what the homicide cop say right which actually want is you actually want you know it be if you want the emotional response of like I can't believe that you're asking me questions this detailed and specific and picky and they kind of figure out what you're doing and then they get upset like that's good that's perfect right but but they they have you know but then they have to prove in themselves in the sense of like they have to be able to answer the questions in in in great detail. Do you think that people that are able to answer those questions in great detail have actually taken the time to systematically think through the if and. All the possible implications of what they're going to do and they have a specific vision in mind of how things need to turn out or will turn out or do you think that they have a vision and it's a no matter what it will work out because the world was sort of bend around it I mean in other words do you think that they place their vision in context. Or they simply have a vision and they have that tunnel vision of that thing and that's going to be it let's use you for example with net scape I mean that's how I first came to know your name. When you were conceiving net scape did you think okay there's this search engine and this browser and and it's going to be this thing that looks this way and works this way and feels this way. Did you think that and also think about you know that there was going to be a gallery of other search engines and it would fit into that landscape of other search engines or you just projecting your vision of this thing as this unique and special. Greenchild we give the general answer and then we can talk about the specific example so the general answer is what with entrepreneurship creativity innovation is what economists call decision making under uncertainty. And so in both parts of the important decision making like you're going to make a ton of decisions because you have to decide what to do what not to do and then uncertainty which is like the world's a complicated place right and in mathematical terms the world's a complex adaptive system with feedback loops and like it's really I mean it's it's extremely you know as a gasma of the you know that in his novels he. We wrote about this field called psycho history right which is the idea that there's like a supercomputer that can predict the future of like human affairs right and it's like we don't have that. Yeah, not yeah. We're going to that later. We certainly don't have that yet. And so you're just dealing you know no one Terry commanders call this the fog of war right you're just dealing with the situation where the number variables are just off the charts. It's all these other people right who are inherently unpredictable making all these decisions in different directions and then the whole system is combinatorial which is these people are climbing with each other influencing the decisions. And so I mean look the most straightforward kind of way to think about this is it's just it's amazing like anybody who believes in economic central planning it always blows my mind because it's just like try opening a restaurant. Like try just opening a restaurant on the corner down here and like 50 50 odds the restaurant's going to work and like all you have to do to run a restaurant is like have a thing and serve food and like. And it's like most restaurants fail right and so and restaurant people run restaurants are like pretty smart like they're you know they're usually think about these things very hard they all want to succeed. And it is hard to do that and so to start a tech company or to start an artistic movement or to or to fight a war. Like you're just going into this like basically about conceptual battleground or military terms real battleground where there's just like incredible levels of complexity branching future paths. And so there's nothing it's you know there's nothing predictable and so what we look for is basically the sort of drop the really good innovators they've got a drive to basically be able to cope with that deal with that and they basically do that and two steps. So one is they try to pre plan as much as they possibly can and and we call that the process of navigating the call the idea maze right and so the idea maze basically is I've got this general idea and it might be the Internet's going to work or search or whatever. And then it's like okay in their head they have thought through of like okay if I do it this way that way this third way here's what will happen then I have to do that then I have to do this then I have to bring somebody do that here's the technical challenge I'm going to hit. And they've got in their head says best anybody could they've got as complete a sort of a map of possible futures as they could possibly have and this is where I say when you ask them increasing detail questions that's what you're trying to kind of get them to kind of chart out is okay how far ahead have you thought and how much are you anticipating all of the different twists in terms of this going to take. Okay so then they start on day one and then of course what happens is you know now they're in it they're in the fog of war right there and through uncertainty and now that idea maze is maybe not helpful practically but now they're going to be basically constructing on the fly day by day as they learn and discovering new things. And as the world changes around them and of course it's a feedback loop because they're going to change you know if their things starts to work it's going to change the world and then the fact the world is changing is going to cause you know their plan to you know to change as well. And so yeah the great ones basically they they course correct you know the great ones course correct every single day you know they take stock of what they've learned you know they modified the plan the great ones tend to think in terms of hypotheses right like a scientific sort of mentality which is a tend to think okay I'm going to try this like I'm going to go into the world I'm an analysis I'm doing this for sure. I'm going to say like this is my plan and I'm going to tell all my employees that I'm going to tell all my investors that I'm going to put a stake in there as my plan and then I'm going to try it right and even though I sound like I have complete certainty I know that I need to test to find out whether it's going to work and if it's not then I have to go back to all those same people and I have to say well actually we're not going left for going right and they have to run that loop thousands of times right and they had you know to get through the other side and this this light of the creation of this great term pivot which has been very helpful in our industry because the the word when I was when I was going to the word we use was fuck up. And if it like sounds like so much better sounds like so much more professional but yeah you let make mistakes you it's just it's just too complicated to understand you course correct you adjust you evolve often these things at least in business the businesses that end up working really well tend to be different than the original plan but that's that's part of the process of a really smart founder basically working their way through reality right as as they're executing their plan. The way you're describing this has parallels to a lot of models in biology and the practice of science of you know random walks but that aren't truly random pseudo random walks in biology et cetera but one thing that is becoming clear from the way you're describing this is that. I could imagine a great risk to early success so for instance somebody develops a product people are excited by it. They start to implement that product but then the landscape changes and they don't learn how to pivot to use the less profane version of it right they don't learn how to do that in other words the and I think of everything these days or most everything in terms of reward schedules and dopamine reward schedules because that is the universal currency of reward and so when you talk about the Sean Parker quote of learning to enjoy the taste of one's own blood that is very different than learning to enjoy the taste of success. Right it's about internalizing success as a process of being self determined and less agreeable et cetera in other words building up of those five traits becomes the source of dopamine perhaps in a way that's highly adaptive so on the outside we just see the product the end product the iPhone the MacBook the net scape et cetera but I have to presume and I'm not a psychologist but I have done neuro physiology and I've studied the dopamine system enough to know that what I'm going to do is I'm going to do that and I'm going to do that. It's being rewarded in the context of what you're describing sounds to be a reinforcement of those five traits rather than oh it's going to be this particular product or the company is going to look this way the logo is going to be this or that that all seems like the peripheral to what's really going on that great innovators are really in the process of establishing neural circuitry that is all about reinforcing the me and the process of being me. Yeah so this goes to yeah this is like extrinsic versus intrinsic motivation so the Steve Jobs kind of Zen version of this writer the sort of hippie version of this was the journey as the reward and you know you always told him you always told his employees that it's like look like you know everybody thinks in terms of these big public markers like the stock price of the IPO or the product launch or whatever he's like no it's it's actually the process itself is the point right and if you hit your point if you have that mentality then that's it that's an intrinsic motivation that an extra intrinsic motivation and so that's the kind of intrinsic motivation that can keep you going for it. Another way to think about it is competing against yourself right it's like can I get better at doing this right and can I prove to myself that I can get better there's also a big social component to this and this is one of the reasons why it's so the Valley Punch is so far above its weight as a place there's a psychological component which is also goes to the comparison set so a phenomenon that we observed over time is the leading tech company in any city will aspire to be as large as the previous leading tech company in that city but often not larger right because they sort of have a model of success and as long as they beat that level of success they kind of you know check the box like they've made it's you know and and then they you but then in contrast you're in Silicon Valley and you look around and it's just like Facebook and Cisco and Oracle and you know to the packer and gladiators yeah and you're just like looking at these you know giants and and you know many of them are still you know Mark Zuckerberg still you don't want to work every day and like trying to try to do that. You know like and so like these people are like you know the role models are like a live right right there right and it's so clear like how much better they are and how much bigger their accomplishments are and so what we find is young founders in that environment have much greater aspirations right because they just again it maybe it's like maybe at that point maybe it's the social status maybe there's there's an extrinsic component to that but I remember maybe it helps calibrate that internal system to basically say actually you know no the opportunity here is not to build a local you know which I call local maximum form of success but let's build to a global maximum form of success which is which is something as big as who possibly can ultimately the great ones are probably driven more internally than externally when it comes down to it and that is where you get this phenomenon where you get people who are you know extremely successful and extremely wealthy who very easily can punch out and move to Fiji and just call it and they're still working 16 hour days right and so obviously something explains that that has nothing to do with external rewards and I think it's it's it's an internal thing. As many of you know I've been taking AG1 daily since 2012 so I'm delighted that they're sponsoring the podcast. AG1 is a vitamin mineral probiotic drink that's designed to meet all of your foundational nutrition needs. Now of course I try to get enough servings of vitamins and minerals through whole food sources that include vegetables and fruits every day but oftentimes I simply can't get enough servings but with AG1 I'm sure to get enough vitamins and minerals and the probiotics that I need and it also contains adaptogens to help buffer stress. Simply put I always feel better when I take AG1. I have more focus and energy and I sleep better and it also happens to taste great. For all these reasons whenever I'm asked if you could take just one supplement what would it be I answer AG1. If you'd like to try AG1 go to drinkag1.com slash huberman to claim a special offer. They'll give you five free travel packs plus a year supply of vitamin D3K2 again that's drinkag1.com slash huberman. I've heard you talk a lot about the inner landscape, the inner psychology of these folks and I appreciate that we're going even deeper into that today and we will talk about the landscape realm whether or not Silicon Valley or New York whether or not there are specific cities that are ideal for certain types of pursuits. I think there was an article written by Paul Graham some years ago about the conversations that you over here in a city will tell you everything you need to know about whether or not you belong there in terms of your professional pursuits. Some of that's changed over time and now we should probably add Austin to the mix because it was written some time ago. In any event I want to return to that but I want to focus on an aspect of this intrinsic versus extrinsic motivators in terms of something that's a bit more cryptic which is one's personal relationships. If I think about the catalog of innovators in Silicon Valley some of them like Steve Jobs had complicated personal lives, romantic personal lives early on and it sounds like he worked it out. I wasn't there a couple of therapists but when he died he was in marriage for all the world seemed like a happy marriage. You also have examples of innovators who have had many partners, many children with other partners, Elon comes to mind. I don't think I'm disclosing anything that isn't already obvious. Those could have been happy relationships and just had many of them. The reason I'm asking this is you can imagine that for the innovator the person with these traits who's trying to build up this thing, whatever it is, that having someone or several people in some cases who just truly believe in you when the rest of the world may not believe in you yet or at all could be immensely powerful and we have examples from cults that embody this. We have examples from politics. We have examples from tech innovation and science and I've always been fascinated by this because I feel like it's the more cryptic and yet very potent form of allowing someone to build themselves up. It's a combination of inner psychology and extrinsic motivation because obviously if that person were to die or leave them or cheat on them pair up with some other innovator which we've seen several times recently and in the past, it can be devastating to that person but what are your thoughts on the role of personal and in particular romantic relationship as it relates to people having an idea and their feeling that they can really bring that idea to fruition in the world. It's a real mixed bag. You have lots of examples in all directions and I think it's something like something like something I follow. So first is we talked about the personality traits of these people. They tend to be highly disagreeable. Doesn't foster a good romantic relationship. I may have heard of that once or twice before. A friend who may have given me that example. Yeah, right. And you know, maybe you just need to find the right person who like helps mess that and is willing to, you know, there's a lot of relationships where it's always this question about relationships, right? Which is do you want to have the same personality grow for a while, the same behavioral traits, basically as your partner or do you actually want to have, you know, is it an opposite thing? And you know, look, I'm sure you've seen this. There are relationships where you'll have somebody who's highly disagreeable, who's paired with somebody who's highly agreeable and actually we're not great because one person just gets to be on their soapbox all the time and then the person's just like, okay, right? It's fine, right? It's fine. It's good. You know, you put two disagreeable people together, you know, maybe sparks fly and they have great conversations all the time and maybe they come to hate each other, right? And so, so anyway, so these people, if you're going to be with one of these people, you're fishing out of the disagreeable end of the pond. And again, when I say disagreeable, I don't mean, you know, these are these are normal distributions. I don't mean like 60% disagreeable, 80% disagreeable. The people we're talking about are 99.99% disagreeable, right? So these are ordinary, ordinary people. So, so so part of it's that. And then of course they have the other personality traits, right? They're, they're, you know, super conscientious. They're super driven. As a consequence, they tend to work really hard. They tend to not have a lot of time for, you know, communications for other things. You know, they're not there. What they don't enjoy them if they're forced to go on them. And so, again, that kind of thing can fray at a relationship. So, so there's a, so there's a fair amount in there that's loaded. Like somebody's going to partner with one of these people needs to be signed up for the ride. And that's, that's a hard thing, you know, it's a hard thing to do. Or you need a true partnership with two of these, which is also hard to do. So I think that's part of it. And then look, I think a big part of it is, you know, people achieve a certain level of success. And, you know, either in their own minds or, you know, publicly. And then they start to be able to get away with things, right? And they start to be able to say, well, okay, you know, now we're rich and successful and famous. And now I deserve, you know, and this is where you get into, I've, I've used this now in the realm of personal choice. You get into this thing where people start to think that they deserve things. And so they start to behave in, you know, very bad ways. And then they blow up their personal worlds as a consequence. And maybe they regret it later. And maybe they don't, right? It's always always a question. So yeah, so I think there's that. And then I don't know, like, yeah, some people just need, maybe the other part of it is, some people just need more emotional support than others. And I don't know that that's a big, I don't know that that tilts either way. Like I know, I know some of these people who have like great loving relationships and seem to draw very much on having this kind of firm foundation to rely upon. And then I know other people who are just like their personalizers, just a continuous train wreck. And it doesn't seem, it doesn't seem to matter. Like professionally, they just keep doing what they're doing. And maybe there's maybe we can talk here about like, you know, whatever is the personality trait for risk taking, right? Some people are so incredibly risk prone that they need to take risk and all aspects of their lives at all times. And if part of their life gets stable, they find a way to blow it up. And that's some of these people you could describe in those terms also. Yeah, let's talk about that. Because I think risk taking and sensation seeking is something that fascinates me for my own reasons and in my observations of others. Does it dovetail with these five traits in a way that can really serve innovation in ways that can benefit everybody? The reason I say to benefit everybody is because there is a view of how we're painting this picture of the innovator as this like really cruel person. But oftentimes what we're talking about are innovations that make the world far better for billions of people. Yeah, that's right. Yeah. And by the way, everything we're talking about also is not just intact or science or in business. It's also everything we're also talking about is true for the arts. Right? So, and you know, the history of like artistic expression is, you know, you know, you people with all these same kinds of traits. Well, I was thinking about Picasso and his and his regular turnover of lovers and partners. And he was very open about the fact that it was one of the sources of his productivity, slash creativity. He wasn't shy about that. I suppose if he were alive today, it might be a little bit different. He might be judged a little differently. Right. Or that was his story for, you know, behaving in a pattern that, you know, it was very awful for the people around him and he didn't care. Right. Maybe they left him. Yeah. Like, you know, who knows, right? So, so, so, you know, if it puts in text all this, but, but no, okay, so I have a theory. So here's a theory. This, this is one of these. I keep a list of things that will get me kicked out of a dinner party. And at the top, it's going to be given point. Do you read it before you go in? Yeah, I just, yeah. So here's the thing they can get me kicked out of dinner party, especially these days. So think of the kind of person where I should very clear that they're like super high to your point. As somebody who's super high off, whatever to mean they're in, they've done things that have like fundamentally like changed the world, they've brought new, whether it's businesses or technologies or art, you know, works of art, you know, entire schools of creative expression, in some cases, to the world. And then at a certain point, they blow themselves to smithereens. And they do that either through a massive, like financial scandal. They do that through a massive personal breakdown. They do that through some sort of public expression that causes them a huge amount of problems. They say the wrong thing, maybe not once, but several hundred times. And blow themselves to smithereens. And there's this kind of arc. There's this moral arc that people kind of want to apply, which is like the Icarus flying too close to the sun. He had it coming and he needed to keep his ego under control. And you get kind of this, kind of this judgment that applies. So I have a different theory on this. So the term I used to describe these people, and by the way, a lot of other people who don't actually blow themselves up, but get close to it, which is a whole other set of people. I call them martyrs to civilizational progress. So we're back with civilizational progress. So look, the only way civilizational gets moved forward is when people like this do something new, right? Because civilizational as a whole does not do new things, groups of people do not do new things. These things don't happen automatically. By default, nothing changes. The only way civilizational change on any of these axes ever happens is because one of these people stands up and says, no, I'm going to do something different than what everybody else has ever done before. So this is progress. This is actually how it happens. Sometimes they get lionish and rewarded. Sometimes they get crucified. Sometimes the crucification is literal. Sometimes it's just symbolic, but they are those kinds of people. And then murders. Like when they go down and flames, like they have, and again, this is where it really scares the people's moral judgments. Because everybody wants to have this sort of super clear story of like, OK, he did a bad thing and he was punished. And I'm like, no, no, no, no, no, no. He was the kind of person who was going to do great things and also was going to take on a level of risk and take on a level of extreme behavior such that he was going to expose himself to flying to close to the sun, wings melt, crash the ground. But it's the package deal. The reason you have the Picasso's and the Beethoven's and all these people is because they're willing to take these extreme level of risks. They are that creative and original, not just in their art or their business, but in everything else that they do. But they will set themselves up to be able to fail. Psychologic, you know, a psychologist would probably a psychiatrist would probably say, you know, maybe, to what extent do they actually have a death wish? Do they actually, you know, at some point do they want to punish themselves or do they want to fail? That I don't know. But you see this, they deliberately move themselves to close to the sun. And you can see it when it's happening because like if they get too far from the sun, they deliberately move back towards it, right? You know, they come right back and they want the risk. And so anyway, like I, yeah, so murderous to civilizational progress, like this is how progress happens when these people crash and burn the natural inclination is to judge them morally. I tend to think we should basically say, look, and I don't even know if this means like giving them a moral pass or whatever. But it's like, look, like this is how civilizational civilizational progress is. And we need to at least understand that there's a self-sacrificial aspect of this that may be tragic and often is tragic, but it is quite literally self-sacrificial. Are there any examples of great innovators who were able to compartmentalize their risk taking to such a degree that they had what seemed to be a morally impeccable life in every domain except in their business pursuits? That's right. So some people are very highly controlled like that. Some people are able to very narrowly, and I don't really want to set myself an example on a lot of this, but I will tell you, as an example, I will never use debt in business number one, number two, I have the most placid personal life you can imagine, number three, and the last person in the world is ever going to do an extreme sport. I mean, I'm not even going to go on the saw on the ice bath. Like I'm not doing any of this, like I don't end up doing any of that. I'm not co-skying. No, I'm not going to do that. I'm not on the tighten. I'm not going down to see the Titanic. I'm not doing any of this stuff. I have no interest. I don't like golf. I have no interest in any of this stuff. Right? And I know people like this, right? They're very high achievers. It's just like, yeah, they're completely segmented. They're extremist acres in business. They're completely buttoned down on the personal side. They're completely buttoned down financially. They're scrupulous with following every rule of law. You can possibly imagine. But they're still fantastic innovators. And then I know many others who are just like, their life is on fire all the time in every possible way. And whenever it looks like the fire is turning into embers, they figure out a way to like, real life to fire, right? And they just really want to live on the edge. And so I think that's maybe, I think that's an independent variable. And again, I would have played the same thing. I think the same thing applies to the arts. You know, classical music is an example. Like I think Bach was, you know, as an example, one of the kind of best musicians of all time had just a completely sedate personal life. You know, never had any ever at behavior at all. This personal life, you know, family man, tons of kids, apparently, you know, killer of the community, right? And so like if Bach could be Bach and yet not like burn his way through, you know, 300 Messages or whatever, you know, maybe you can too. So in thinking about these two different categories of innovators, those that take on tremendous risk in all domains of their life and those that take on tremendous risk in a very compartmentalized way, I don't know what the percentages are. But I have to wonder if in this modern age of the public being far less forgivable when I'm referring to is cancel culture. Do you think that we are limiting the number of innovations in total? Like by just simply frightening or eliminating an enormous category of innovators because they don't have the confidence or the means or the strategies in place to regulate. So they're just either bowing out or they're getting crossed off, they're getting canceled one by one. So do you think the public is less tolerant than it used to be or more tolerant? Well, the systems that I'm not going to be careful here, I think the large institution systems are not tolerant of what the public tells them they shouldn't be tolerant of. And so if there's enough noise, there's enough noise in the mob, I think institutions bow out. And here I'm referring not just to universe, they essentially say, okay, they let the cancellation proceed. Or they, and maybe they're the gavel that comes down, but they're not the lever that got the thing going. And so I'm not just thinking about universities, I'm also thinking about advertisers, I'm thinking about the big movie houses that cancel a film that a given actor might be in because they had something in their personal life that's still getting worked out. I'm thinking about people who are in a legal process that's not yet resolved, but the public has decided they're a bad person, et cetera. And my question is that we're really talking about the public. I agree with your question, and I'm going to come back to it, but I'm going to examine one part of your question, which is this really the public we're talking about. And I would just say exhibit A is who is the current front runner for the Republican nomination today. The public, at least on one side of the political aisle seems very on board, right? Number two, like look, there's a certain musician who like, flew too close to the sun, gloom, self-dust, mithering, sees still hitting all time highs on music streams every month. The public seems fine. Like I think the public might, I would argue the public is actually more open to these things than it actually maybe ever has been. And we could talk about that's the case. I think it's a differentiation, and this is what your question was aiming at, but it's a differentiation between the public and the elites. And so my view is everything that you just described as an elite phenomenon, and actually the public is very much not on board with it. Interesting. And so what's actually happening is the division, what's happened is the public and the elites have gapped out. The public is more forgiving of what previously might have been considered kind of ever in extreme behavior. I've got Fitzgerald there, no second acts in American lives. It turns out completely wrong. Turns out there's second acts there at X4, apparently you can have a limited number of acts. The public is actually up for it. Yeah, I mean, I think of somebody like Mike Tyson, right? I feel like he's, every, his life exemplifies everything that's amazing and great and also terrible about America. If we took Mike Tyson to dinner tonight at any restaurant, anywhere in the United States, what would happen? He would be loved. Oh, he would be like, the outpouring of enthusiasm and passion and love would be incredible. Like it would be unbelievable. This is a great example. Like it just like the, and again, I'm not even gonna drop more. I'm not even gonna say I agree with that or disagree with that. I'm just like, I think we all intuitively know that the public is just like 100% like absolutely, like he's a legend. Like he's a legend, he's a living legend. I love him. He's a cultural touchstone. Absolutely. And then you see when he shows up at movies, right? He shows, I have to remember the, I mean, the big breakthrough where I figured this out with respect to him because I don't really follow sports. But when he showed up and that, it was that first hangover movie and he shows up. And then you know, it was, I was in a theater and like the audience just goes, but Neon is crazy. They're so excited to see him. Yeah, he evokes delight. I always say that Mike Tyson is the only person I'm aware of that can wear a shirt with his own name on it. And it somehow doesn't seem wrong. In fact, it just kind of makes you like him more. Yeah. His ego feels very contoured in a way that he knows who he is and who he was. And yet there's a humbleness woven in. Maybe as a consequence of all that he's been through. I don't know. But yeah, people love Mike. Publicly close him. Now, exactly. Now, you know, if he shows up to like, like, like, like, like, like, like, I think you're probably gonna get a different reaction. I don't know. I don't know. I mean, David Simon, you know, the guy who wrote the wire gave a talk at Harvard. And it sounded to me based on his report of that, which is very interesting, in fact, that people adore people who are connected to everybody in that way. Like, I feel like everybody loves Mike from above his status, the sides, the lowest status. He's just sort of, he occupies this halo of love and adoration. Okay. All right. Yeah. And then, like, the other side of this is, is, is, is, and you've kind of alluded to this, the institution. So, so basically it's like the people who are like, at least nominally in charge, or feel like they should be in charge. Yeah, I want to make sure we define elite. So you're not necessarily talking about people who are wealthy, you're talking about people who have authority within institutions. So the ultimate definition of elite is who can get who fired? Right? Like, that's the ultimate. Who can get who fired boycott a blacklisted ostracized? Like, when pushed, prosecuted, jailed, like, when push comes to shove. Right. I think that's always the question. Who can destroy his career? Of course, you'll notice that that is heavily asymmetric. Because when these fights play out, like, there's very clear where to side, you can get the other side fired, which side, which side can't. And so, yeah. So look, I think we live in a period of time where the elites have gotten to be extreme in a number of dimensions. And, you know, I think it's characterized by, for sure, extreme group think, extreme sanctimony, extreme, you know, moral, you know, I would say, dougin, you know, extreme, you know, this, this weird sort of modern puritanism, and then an extreme sort of morality of light punishment and terror, I guess they're perceived enemies. But I wanted to go through that because I actually think, I actually think that's a very different phenomenon. I think what's happening with the elites is very different that what's happening in the population at large. And then, of course, I think there's a feedback loop in there, which is, I think the population at large is not on board with that program. Right. I think the elites are aware that the population is not on board with that program. I think they judge the population negatively as a consequence. That causes the elites to harden their own positions. That causes them to be even more alienating to the population. And so, they're, you know, they're in sort of an oppositional negative feedback loop. And yeah, it's going to be, and you know, but again, it's a sort of question to who can get who fired. And so, you know, elites are really good at getting like normal people fired, ostracized bands, you know, hip pieces in the press, like whatever, you know, for normal people to get elites fired, they have to really light band together, right? And really amount to serious challenge, which mostly doesn't happen, but might be starting to happen in some cases. Do you think this power of the elites over stemmed from social media sort of going against its original purpose? I mean, when you think social media, you think you're giving each and every person their own little reality TV show, their own voice. And yet, we've seen a dramatic uptick in the number of cancellations and firings related to immoral behavior based on things that were either done or amplified on social media. It's almost as if the public is holding the wrong end of the knife. Yeah, so the way to describe it, so you use these two terms, and there's somewhat interchangeable, but it leads to institutions, and then there's so many interchangeable, because who runs the institutions, the elites, right? And so it's sort of a self-reinforcing thing. Anyway, institutions of all kinds, institutions, everything from the government, bureaucracies, companies, nonprofits, foundations, NGOs, tech companies, you know, on and on and on, like, you know, people who were in charge of big complexes, and that carry a lot of basically power and influence and capability and money as a consequence with their positional authority, right? So, you know, the head of a giant foundation may never have done anything in their life that would cause somebody to have a happy, you know, the messy person, but they're in charge of this, you know, gigantic multi-billion dollar complex and have all this power and the results. So that's just to define terms, the least institutions. So it's actually interesting. Gallup has been doing polls on the following, on the question of trust in institutions, which is sort of a, therefore, proxy for trust in elites, basically since the early 1970s, and what you find, and they do this across all the categories of big institutions, you know, basically everyone I just talked about, a bunch of others, big business, all business banks, newspapers, broadcast television, the military, police. And so they've got like 30 categories or something. And basically what you see is almost all the categories basically started in the early 70s at like 60 or 70% trust, and now they've, basically almost across the board, they've just done it, they had a complete, basically, linear slide down for 50 years, basically my whole life. And you know, they're now bottoming out, you know, Congress and journalists bottom out at like 10%. Right, like the two groups, everybody hates are like Congress and journalists. And then it's like a lot of other big institutions are like 20 in their 20s, 30s, 40s. Actually, big business actually scores fairly high, tech actually scores quite high, the military score is quite high, but basically everything else has really caved in. And so, so this is sort of my fundamental challenge everybody who basically says, and you didn't do this, but you'll hear the simple form of this, which is social media caused the current trouble. And it's called as an example, collapse in faith and institutions and the leads, let's call that part of the current trouble. Everybody's like, well, social media caused that. I was like, well, no, social media, social media is new, right? In the last, you know, social media is effectively new, practically speaking since 2010, 2012, was when it really took off. And so if the trend started in the early 1970s, right? And it's been continuous, then we're dealing with something broader. And Martin Gurry wrote, I think the best book on this, is called The Revolt of the Public, where he goes through this in detail. And he does say that social media had a lot to do with what's happened in the last decade. But he says, yeah, if you go back, you look further, it was basically two things coinciding. One was just a general change in the media environment. And in particular, the 1970s is when you started, and especially in the 1980s, is when you started to get specifically talk radio, which was a new outlet. And then you also started, you also got cable television. And then you also, by the way, it's actually interesting in the 50s, 60s, you had a paperback books, which was another one of these, which was an outlet. So you had a fracturing in the media landscape that started in the 50s through the 80s. And then, of course, the internet went open. Having said that, if the elites and institutions were fantastic, you would know it more than ever. Because information is more accessible. And so the other thing that he says, and I agree with, is the public is not being tricked into thinking the elites and institutions are bad. They're learning that they're bad, right? And the mystery, and therefore, the mystery of the Gallup poll is why those numbers aren't all just zero, right? Which is arguably a lot of cases where they should be. I think one reason that, by the way, he thinks this is bad. So he and I have a different view. So here's our he and I disagree. He thinks this is bad. So he basically says, you can't replace elites with nothing. You can't replace institutions with nothing. If, because what you're just left with is just going to be wreckage, you're going to left with a completely basically, atomized out of control society that has no ability to marshal any sort of activity in a direction. It's just going to be a doggy dog awful world. I have a very different view on that, which we can talk about. Yeah, I'd love to hear your views on that. Yeah. I'd like to take a quick break and acknowledge our sponsor inside tracker. Inside tracker is a personalized nutrition platform that analyzes data from your blood and DNA to help you better understand your body and help you meet your health goals. I'm a big believer in getting regular blood work done for the simple reason that many of the factors that impact your immediate and long-term health can only be analyzed from a quality blood test. However, with a lot of blood tests out there, you get information back about blood lipids about hormones and so on, but you don't know what to do with that information. With inside tracker, they have a personalized platform that makes it very easy to understand your data, that is to understand what those lipids, what those hormone levels, et cetera mean, and behavioral supplement, nutrition, and other protocols to adjust those numbers to bring them into the ranges that are ideal for your immediate and long-term health. Inside tracker's ultimate plan now includes measures of both APOB and of insulin, which are key indicators of cardiovascular health and energy regulation. If you'd like to try inside tracker, you can visit inside tracker.com slash Huberman to get 20% off any of inside tracker's plans. Again, that's inside tracker.com slash Huberman to get 20% off. The quick question I was gonna ask before we go there is I think that one reason that I and many other people sort of reflexively assume that social media caused the demise of our faith in institutions is, well, first of all, I wasn't aware of this lack of correlation between the decline in faith in institutions and the rise of social media, but secondarily that we've seen some movements that have essentially rooted themselves in tweets, in comments, in posts that get amplified, and those tweets and comments and posts come from everyday people. In fact, I can't name one person who initiated a given cancellation or movement because it was the sort of dog piling or mob adding on to some person that was essentially anonymous. So I think that for many of us, we have the bottom to use neuroscience language to sort of a bottom up in a perspective. Oh, someone sees something in their daily life or experiences something in their daily life and they tweet about it, or they comment about it, or they post about it, and then enough people dog pile on the accused that it picks up force and then the elites feel compelled, obligated to cancel somebody. That tends to be the narrative. And so I think the logical conclusion is, oh, social media allows for this to happen, whereas normally someone would just be standing on the corner shouting or calling lawyers that don't have faith in them. And you've got the air and rock of itch model of a, you know, that turns into a movie, but that's a rare case of this lone woman who's got this idea in mind about how big institution is doing wrong. Or somebody is doing wrong in the world and then can leverage big institutions, excuse me. But the way that you describe it is that the elites are leading this shift. So what is the role of the public in it? I mean, just to give it a concrete example, if, for instance, no one tweeted or commented a MeToo, or no one tweeted or commented about some ill behavior of some, I don't know, university faculty member or a business person, would the elite have come down on them anyway? Oh, yeah. So what's happening? So based on what I've seen over the years, is it's, there is so much estriturfing right now. There are entire categories of people who are paid to do this. Some of them we call journalists, some of them we call activists, some of them we call NGO, you know, non-profit, some of them we call university professors, like some of them we call grad students, like whatever, they're paid to do this. I don't know if you've ever looked into the misinformation industrial complex. There's this whole universe of basically these funded groups that basically do quote unquote misinformation and they're constantly mounting these kinds of attacks. They're constantly trying to gin up this kind of basically panic because somebody gets fired. So it's not grassroots. It's the opposite grassroots. No, almost always when you trace these things back, it was a journalist, it was an activist, it was a public figure of some kind. These are entrepreneurs. These are entrepreneurs in a sort of a weird way. Like they're basically they're paid, they're job, mission calling, it's all wrapped up together. Like they're true believers, but they're also getting paid to do it. And there's a giant funding, I mean, there's a very large funding complex for this coming from, you know, certain profile people who put huge amounts of money into this. Is this well known? Yes, well, so I mean, it isn't my world. So this is what the social media companies have been on the receiving end of for the last decade. Is this it's basically a political media activism complex with very deep pockets behind it? And you've got people who basically, literally people who sit all day and watch the TV network on the other side or watch the Twitter, physical side, and they wait, they basically wait. It's like, every politician, this has been the case for a long time now, every politician who goes out and gives stuff speeches, you'll see there's always somebody in the crowd of the camp quarter, or with now with a phone recording them. And that's somebody from the other campaign who's paid somebody to just be there and like record every single thing the politician says so that when I met Ramney says, whatever the 47% thing they've got it on tape, and then they clip it and they try to make it viral. So this stuff is, and again, like look, like these people believe what they're doing, I'm not saying it's even dishonest, like these people believe what they're doing, they think they're fighting a holy war, they think they're protecting democracy, they think they're protecting civilization, they think they're protecting whatever it is they're protecting. But they, and then they know how to use the tools. And so they know how to, they know how to try to gin up the outrage. And then by the way, sometimes it works in social cascades, sometimes it works, sometimes it doesn't, sometimes they cascades, sometimes they don't. But if you follow these people on Twitter, this is what they do every day, they're constantly trying to like life as fire. Right. I assume it was really bottom up, but it sounds like it's sort of a middle level, and then it captures the elites, and then the thing takes on our life of its own. By the way, it also intersects with the trust and safety groups at the social media firms, right, who are responsible for figuring out who gets promoted, who gets banned. Right across this, and you'll notice one large social media company has recently changed hands and has implemented a different kind of, instead of trust and safety. And all of a sudden a different kind of white government has all of a sudden started to work. But it wasn't working before that, and another kind of white government is not working as well anymore. And so for sure there's intermediation happening. Like look, the stuff that's happening in the world today is being intermediate through social media, because social media is the defining media of our time. But there are people who know how to do this and do this for a living. So no, I very much view this as a, I view very much the cancellation wave like this whole thing. It's an elite phenomenon. And when it appears to be a grassroots thing, it's either grassroots among the elites, which is possible, because there's fairly large number of people who are signed up for that, particularly crusade. But there's also a lot of astroturfing that's taking place inside that. The question is, what point is the population at large get pulled into this? And maybe there are movements at certain points in time where they do get pulled in, and then maybe later they get disillusioned. And so then there's some question there. And then there's another question of like, well, if the population at large is going to decide what these movements are, are they going to be the same movements as the elites want? How are the elites going to react with the population? Actually, like fully expressed itself. Right. And so there's, and like I said, there's a feedback loop between these where the more extreme the elites get, they tend to push the population to more extreme views on the other side and vice versa. So ping-pong's back and forth. And so, yeah, this is our world. This explains a lot. I want to make sure that I, I mean, so that Michelinberger, Matt Taiyabi, a bunch of these guys have done a lot of work. If you just look into what's called the misinformation industrial complex, you'll find a network of money and power that is really quite amazing. I've seen more and more Michelinberger showing up, right? And he's just like, he's just on this stuff. He and Taiyabi, they're just, they're literally just like tracking money. I just like, it's very clear how the money flows, including like a remarkable amount of money out of the government, which is of course like in theory, very concerning. Very interesting. The government should not be funding programs that take away people's constitutional rights and yet somehow that is what's been happening. Very interesting. Yes. I want to make sure that I hear your ideas about why the decline in confidence in institutions and is not necessarily problematic. Is this going to be a total destruction burning down on the forest that will lead to new life? Is that your view? Yeah, well, so this is the thing. And look, there's a question if you're, there's a couple questions in here, which is like how bad is it really? Like how bad are they, right? And I, you know, I think they're pretty bad. A lot of them are pretty actually bad. And so that's one big question. And then yeah, the other question is like, okay, if an institution has gone bad or a group of believes have gone bad, like can this is wonderful word reform, right? Can they be reformed? Everybody always wants to reform everything and yet somehow like nothing ever, quite ever gets reformed, right? And so people are trying to reform, you know, housing policy in the Bay Area for decades and you know, we're not building, we're building fewer houses than ever before. So somehow reform movements seem to lead to more, just more bad stuff. But anyway, yeah, so if you have an existing institution, can it be reform, can it be fixed from the inside? What's happening in universities? Like there's a lot of professors at Stanford as an example who very much think that they can fix Stanford. Like I don't know what you think, it doesn't seem like it's going in productive directions right now. Well, I mean, there are many things about Stanford that function extremely well. I mean, it's a big institution. It's certainly got its issues like any other place. They're also my employer. Mark's giving me some interesting looks. He wants me to get a little more vocal here. No, no, you don't do that. Oh, no, I mean, I think that, I mean, I mean, I mean, one of the things about being a researcher at a big institution like Stanford is, well, first of all, it meets the criteria that you described before. You know, you look to the left, you look to the right or anywhere above or below you, and you have excellence, right? I mean, I've got a Nobel Prize winner below me whose daddy also want a Nobel Prize and there is scientific offspring is likely to win. I mean, it inspires you to do bigger things than one ordinarily would, no matter what. So there's that and that's great and that persists. There's all the bureaucratic red tape about trying to get things done and how to implement decisions is very hard and there are a lot of reasons for that. And then of course, there are the things that many people are aware of, are there are public accusations about people and positions are great leadership and that's getting played out. And the whole thing becomes kind of overwhelming and a little bit opaque when you're just trying to run your lab or live your life. And so I think one of the reasons for this lack of reform that you're referring to is because there's no position of reformer, right? So deans are dealing with a lot of issues, provosts are dealing with a lot of issues, presidents are dealing with a lot of issues and then some in some cases. And so, you know, we don't have a dedicated role of reformer. Someone to go in and say, listen, there's just a lot of fat on this and we need to trim it or we need to create this or do that. There just isn't a system to do that. And that's I think in part because universities are built on old systems and it's like the New York subway. It's amazing, it still works as well as it does and yet it's got a ton of problems also. Well, so the point we can debate the university specifically but the point is like, look, if you do think institutions are going bad and then you have to make it, number one, you have to figure out if you think institutions are going bad. The population largely does think that. And at the very least, the people who run institutions ought to really think hard about what that means. But people still strive to go to these places and I still hear from people who, like for instance, did not go to college or talking about how a university degree is useless, they'll tell you how proud they are that their son or daughter is going to Stanford or is going to UCLA or is going to, or ban a champagne. I mean, it's almost like, to me, that's always the most shocking contradiction is like, yeah, like these institutions don't matter but then when people want to hold up a card that says why their kid is great, it's not about how many pushups they can do or that they started their own business most of the time. It's their going to this university and I think, well, what's going on here? So do you think the median voter in the United States can have their kid go to Stanford? No, no, no. And I think the median voter in the United States could have their kid admitted to Stanford even with perfect SAT? No, no. In this day and age, the competition is so fierce that it requires more. Yeah, so like, so first of all, again, we're dealing here, yes, we're dealing with, there were a small number of very elite institutions. People may admire them or not. Most people have no connectivity to them whatsoever. In the statistics, in the polling, universities are not doing well. The population at law, yeah, they may have fantasies about their kid going to Stanford, but like the reality of it is they have a very, very, say, collapsing view of these institutions. So anyway, there's actually a straight to the question of alternatives then, right? Which is like, okay, if you believe that there's collapsing faith in the institutions, if you believe that it is merit at least in some ways, if you believe that reform is effectively impossible, then you are faced with, and we could debate each of those, but like the population at large seems to believe a lot of that. Then there's a question of like, okay, like, can it be replaced? And if so, like, are you better off replacing these things basically while the old things still exist, or do you actually need to basically clear the field to be able to have a new thing exist? The universities are great case study of this because of the student loans work, right? And the way student loans work is to be able to be to be an actual competitive university in compete, you need to have access to federal student lending. Because if you don't, everybody has to pay out a pocket, and it's completely out of reach for anybody other than, you know, a certain class of either extremely rich or foreign students. So you need to access federal student loan facility to get access to federal student loan facility, you need to be at accredited university. Guess who runs the accreditation council? I don't know, the existing universities, right? So it's a self-londering machine. Like they decided to the new universities, I guess how many new universities get accredited, right, each year to be able to be able to, zero. Zero, right? And so as long as that system is in place, and as long as they have the government wired the way that they do, and as long as they control who gets access to federal student loan funding, like of course there's not gonna be any competition, right? Of course there can't be a new institution that's gonna be able to get to scale, like it's not possible. And so if you actually wanted to create a new system that was better in the, you know, I would argue dozens or hundreds of ways that could obviously be better if you were starting it today, it probably can't be done as long as existing institutions are actually in tact. And this is my counter against to Martin, which is like, yeah, we look, if we're gonna tear down the old, there may be a period of disruption before we get to the new, but we're never gonna get to the new if we don't tear down the old. When you say counter to Martin, you're talking about the author of Revolta the Power. Yeah, Martin Gurry says is like, look, he said basically, what Martin says is as follows, the elites deserve contempt, but the only thing worse than these elites that deserve contempt would be no elites at all, right? And because any basically says on the other side, on the other side of the destruction of the elites and the institutions is nihilism. You're basically left with nothing. And then by the way, there is a nihilistic streak. I mean, there's nihilistic streak in the culture and the politics today. There are people who basically would just say, yeah, just tear the whole system down, right? And they're without any particular plan for what follows. And so you, I think he makes a good point in that you wanna be careful that you actually have a plan on the other side that you think is actually achievable. But again, the counter argument to that is, if you're not willing to actually tear down the old, you're not gonna get to the new. Now, what's interesting, of course, this is what happens every day in business, right? So like the entire way, how do you know that the capitalist system works? The way that you know is that the old companies, when they're no longer like the best at what they do, they get torn down and then they ultimately die and they get replaced by better companies. Yeah, I haven't seen a series in a while. Exactly, right? And we know what's so interesting is, we know in capitalism and in a market economy, we know that that's the sign of health, right? That's the sign of how the system is working properly, right? And in fact, we get actually judged by antitrust authorities in the government on that basis, right? It's like the best defense against antitrust charges is no people are like coming to kill us and they're doing like a really good job of it. That's how we know we're doing our job. And in fact, in business, we are specifically, it is specifically illegal for companies in the same industry to get together and plot and conspire and plan and have things like these accreditation bureaus. Like we would get, if I created the equivalent in my companies of the kind of accreditation bureau that the universities have, I'd get straight to federal prison. Antitrust violation, Sherman Act, straight to prison. People have been sent to prison for that. So in the business world, we know that you want everything subject to market competition. We know that you want creative destruction. We know that you want replacement of the old with superior new. It's just once we get outside of business, we're like, oh, we don't want any of that. We want basically stagnation and log rolling, right? And basically institutional, in such as like entanglements and conflicts of interest, as far as the eye can see. And then we're surprised by the results. So let's play it out as a bit of a thought experiment. So let's say that one small banding together of people who want to start a new university where free exchange of open ideas, where unless somebody has, you know, egregious behavior, violent behavior, you know, truly sexually inappropriate behavior against somebody, you know, the committing a crime, right? They're allowed to be there. They're allowed to be a student or a faculty member, or administrator. And let's just say this accreditation bureau allowed student loans for this one particular university, or let's say that there was an independent source of funding for that university, such that students could just apply there. They didn't need to be part of this, you know, this elite accredited group, which is, it sounds very mafia-like, frankly, not necessarily violent, but certainly coercive in the way that it walls people out. Let's say that then there were 20 or 30 of those, or 40 of those. Do you think that over time that model would overtake the existing model? Is it interesting that those don't exist? Remember the Sherlock Holmes, the doctor didn't bark. It is interesting that those don't exist, right? So there's two possibilities. One is like nobody wants that, which I don't believe. And then the other is like the system is wired in a way that will just simply not allow it. And then you did a hypothetical in which the system would allow it. And my response to that is no, of course, the system won't allow that. Or the people that band together, you know, have enough money or get enough resources to say, look, we can afford to give loans to 10,000 students per year. 10,000 is a trivial number when thinking about the size of a university. And most of them hopefully will graduate in four years, and there'll be a turnover. And do you think that the great future innovators would tend to orient toward that model more than they currently do toward the traditional model? I mean, what I'm trying to get back to here is how do you think that the current model towards innovation, as well as maybe some ways that it still supports innovation? Certainly cancellation and the risk of cancellation from the way that we framed it earlier is going to discourage risk takers of the category of risk takers that take risk in every domain that really like to fly close to the sun and sometimes into the sun. Or are doing research that is just not politically? Yeah, looking into issues that how will you know? Right, that we can't even talk about on this podcast probably without causing a distraction of what we're actually trying to talk about. But it gives up the whole game right there, exactly. So I keep a file, and it's a written file, because I'm afraid to put it into electronic form of all the things that I'm afraid to talk about publicly. Because I come from a lineage of advisors who were all three died young. And I figure, if nothing else, I'll die. And then make it into the world. And when I'll say five, 10 years, 20 years, if not, I know a certain thing, I'm going to die at some point and then we'll see where all those issues stand. In any event, is that less getting longer over time or shorter? Oh, it's definitely getting longer. Isn't that interesting? Yeah, it's getting much longer. I mean, there are just so many issues that I would love to explore on this podcast with experts and that I can't explore, just even if I had a panel of them, because of the way that things get soundbited and segmented out and taken out of context, it's like the whole conversation is lost. And so, unfortunately, there are an immense number equally interesting conversations that I'm excited to have. But it is a little disturbing. Do you remember Lysenkoism? No. Oh, so Lysenko. So famous in the Soviet Union, this is the famous thing. So there was a geneticist named Lysenko. That's why it sounds familiar, but I'm not calling to mind it. Well, he was the guy who did, he did communist genetics. The field of genetics, the Soviets did not approve the field of genetics because of course they believed in the creation of the new man and totally quality. And genetics did not support that. And so if you were doing traditional genetics, you were at the very least fired, if not killed. And so the Skole St. Kostodop and said, oh, I've got Marxist genetics, right, I've got like a whole new field of genetics that basically is politically compliant. And then they actually implemented that in the agriculture system of the Soviet Union. And it's the origin of one of the big reasons that the Soviet Union actually fell, which was they ultimately couldn't feed themselves. So create a new notion of biology as it relates to genetics. Politically crypt biology, right? And so they not only created it, they taught it, they mandated it, they required it. And then they implemented it in agriculture. So yeah, so it's, I never understood. There are a bunch of things in history I never understood until the last decade and that's one of them. Well, I censor myself at the level of deleting certain things, but I don't contort what I do talk about. So I tend to like to play on lush open fields, just makes my life a lot easier. This goes to the rot. This goes to the rot. And I'll come back to your question, but like this goes to the rot in the existing system, which is we've, by the way, I'm no different. I'm just like you, like I'm not trying to naturalize myself on fire either. But like the rot in the existing system and by system, I mean the institutions and the elites. The rot is that the set of things that are no longer allowed. I mean, that list is like obviously expanding over time. And like that's a real, like historically speaking, that doesn't end in good places. Is this group of a particular generation that we can look forward to the time when they eventually die off? It's third of the boomers plus the millennials. So good, we've got a while. Good news, bad news. I mean, Jen X is weird. I'm Jen X. Jen X is weird because we kind of slipped in the middle. We were kind of the, like I don't know how to describe it. We were the kind of non-political generation kind of sandwich between the boomers and the millennials. Jen Z is at a very, I think open question right now, which way they go. I could imagine them being actually much more intense than the millennials. On all these issues, I could also imagine them reacting to the millennials and being far more open minded. We don't know which way it's going to go yet. It's going to go. It might be different groups of them. I mean, I'm Jen X also. I'm 47. You're 50, 50, 50. Right. So group was in John Hughes films. And so where the the jocks and the hippies and the punks and the world divided, they were all segmented. But then it all sort of mishmash together a few years later. And I think that had a lot to do with, like you said, the sort of a political aspect to our generation. If we just knew, we did, the gen X just knew the boomers were nuts, right? Like all the, I mean, this is the canonical right there. One of the great sitcoms of the era was family ties, right? With the character Michael P. Keaton. And he was just like this guy is just like, yeah, my boomer hippie parents are crazy. Like I'm just going to like go into business and like I should do something productive. Like there was something like iconic about that character in our culture. And people like me were like, yeah, obviously going to business. You don't go into like political activism. And then it's just like man that came with him back around with the next generation. So just to touch real quick on university things. So look, there are people trying to do, and I'm actually going to do a thing this afternoon with the University of Austin, which is one of these. And so there are people trying to do new universities. You know, like I would say, it's certainly possible. I hope they succeed. I'm pulling for them. I think it'd be great. I think it'd be great if there were a lot more of them who founded this university. This is a whole group of people. I don't want to free-lapse on that because I don't know originally who the idea was. University of Austin, not UT Austin. Yeah, so this is not UT Austin. It's called University of Austin, or they call it, I think it's UATX. UATX. And so, and it's a lot of very sharp people. So I see it with it. And they're going to try to very much exactly like what you described there, and try to do a new one. I would just tell you, like, the wall of opposition that they're up against is profound. And part of it is economic, which is can they ever get access to federal student lending? And I hope that they can, but I've, you know, it seems nearly inconceivable the way the systems rigged today. And then, you know, the other is just like they're going to, they already have come under, I mean, anybody, anybody who publicly associates with them, who is in traditional academia, immediately gets lit on fire, right? And there's like, you know, cancellation campaigns. Like, so they're up against a wall of social ostracism. Wow. They're up against a wall of, you know, press attacks. They're up against a wall of, you know, people just like doing the thing, pouting on any, anytime anybody says anything, they're going to try to like, run the place down. This reminds me of like, like, Jerry Springer episodes in her all the Rivera episodes, where, you know, it's like if a teen listened to, you know, like, Danzig or Marilyn Manson type music or Metallica that they were considered a devil worshiper. Like, right, now we just laugh, right? We're like, that's crazy, right? People listen to music with all sorts of lyrics and ideas and looks and, and like, that's crazy. But, you know, there were people legitimately sent to prison, I think with the West Memphis three, right? These kids out in West Memphis that look different, acted different, were accused of murders that eventually it was made clear they clearly didn't commit. But they were in prison because of the music they listened to. I mean, this sounds very similar to that. And I remember seeing bumper figures free the West Memphis three and I thought this was some crazy thing. You look into it and this isn't, it's a little bit niche, but I mean, these were real lives and there was an active witch hunt for people that looked different and acted different. And yet, now we're sort of in this inverted world where on the one hand, we're all told that we can express ourselves however we want. But on the other hand, you can't get a bunch of people together to take classes where they learn biology and sociology and econ in Texas, wild. Yes, also the simple explanation is, this is puritanism, right? So this is the original American Puritanism, that just like works itself out through the system in different ways, different times. You know, there's this religious phenomenon in America called the Great Awakening. There'll be these periods in American history where there's basically religiosity fades and then there'll be the snapback effect where you'll have this basically this frenzy basically of religion. In the old days, it would have been 10 revivals and people speaking in tongues and all this stuff. And then in the modern world, it's of the form that we're living through right now. And so yeah, it's just basically these waves of sort of American religious, and remember religion in our time, religious impulses in our time don't get expressed because we live in more advanced times, we live in scientifically informed times. And so religious impulses in our time don't show up as overtly religious, they show up in a secularized form, right? Which of course, conveniently is there for not subject to the First Amendment separation, church and state, right? As long as the church is secular, there's no problem, right? And so, but we're acting out these kind of religious scripts over and over again, and we're in the middle of another religious frenzy. There's a phrase that I hear a lot and I don't necessarily believe it, but I want your thoughts on it, which is the pendulum always swings back. Yeah, not quite. So that's how I feel too, because you know, I'll take, that would be great. Take any number of things that we've talked about and I should so crazy, you know, the way things have gone with institutions or it's so crazy, the way things have gone with social media, it's so crazy, fill in the blank. And people will say, well, the pendulum always swings back. Like it's a stock market or something. You know, after every crash, there'll be an eventual boom and vice versa. By the way, that's not true either, right? Right, most stock markets we have, of course, survivorship, it's all survivorship. Everything is survivorship. It's all everything you just said is obviously survivorship bias, right? So if you look globally, most stock markets over time crash and burn and ever recover. The American stock market has always recovered. Right, I was referring to the American stock market. Yeah, but globally. But the reason everybody refers to American stock market is because it's the one that doesn't do that. The other 200 or whatever, the crash and burn and ever recover. Like let's go check in on the, you know, on Argentina's stock market right now. Like I think it's coming back anytime soon. Yeah, my father is Argentine and immigrated to the US in the 1960s. So he would definitely agree with that. Yeah, like it doesn't come in. Like when they're stocks crash, they don't come back. So and then you know, like Sanctuism, like the Soviet Union never recovered from like Sanctuism. It never came back. It led to the end of the country. You know, literally the things that took down the Soviet Union or oil and wheat and the wheat thing, you can trace the crisis back to like Sanctuism. And so yeah, no, look, I know most things back is true only in the cases where the panel and swing back. Everybody just conveniently forgets all the other circumstances where that doesn't happen. One of the things people, you see this in business also, people have a really hard time confronting really bad news. I don't know if you've noticed that. I think every doctor who's listening right now is like, yeah, no shit. But like like there are situations, have you seen business? There are situations that say a start track, remember a start track, the Kobayashi Maru simulator, right? So the big lesson have become a start track captain as you had to go through the simulation called the Kobayashi Maru and the point was, there's no way, it's a no win scenario, right? And then it turned out like Captain Kirk was the only person to ever win the scenario and the way that he did it was he went in ahead of time and hacked the simulator. Right, it was the only way to actually get through. And then there was a debate whether to fire him or make him a captain, so they made him a captain. And like, you know, the problem is in real life. Like we, you do get the Kobayashi Maru on a regular basis. Like there are actual no win situations that you can't work your way out of. And as a leader, you can't ever cop to that, right? Because you have to like carry things forward and you have to look for every possible choice you can. But like every once in a while, you do run into a situation where it is really not recoverable. At least I've found people just like cannot cope with that. And so what happens is they basically then, they eventually just like excluded from their memory that had ever happened. I'm glad you brought up simulators because I want to make sure that we talk about the new and emerging landscape of AI, artificial intelligence. And I could try and smooth our conversation about moment to go with this one by creating some clever segue, but I'm not going to. Except I'm going to ask, is there a possibility that AI is going to remedy some of what we're talking about? Let's make sure that we earmark that for discussion a little bit later. But first off, because some of the listeners of this podcast might not be as familiar with AI as perhaps they should be. I've all heard about artificial intelligence. People hear about machine learning, et cetera. But it'd be great if you could define for us what AI is. People almost immediately hear AI and think, OK, robots taking over. I'm going to wake up and I'm going to be strapped to the bed. And my organs are going to be pulled out of me. The robots are going to be in my bank account. They're going to kill all my children and dystopia for most. Clearly, that's not the way it's going to go. If you believe that machines can augment human intelligence and human intelligence is a good thing. So tell us what AI is and where you think it can take us both good and bad. Yeah, so there was a big debate when the computer was first invented, which was in the 1930s, 1940s. People like Alan Turing and John Von Neumann and these people. And the big debate at the time was, because they knew they wanted to build computers. They had the basic idea. And there had been like calculating machines before that. And there had been like, there are then these looms that you basically programed with punch cards. And so there was a prehistory to computers that had to do with building sort of increasingly complex calculating machines. So they were kind of on a track. But they knew they were going to be able to build, they call it general purpose computer. That could basically you could program in the way the program computers today. But they had a big debate early on, which is should the fundamental architecture of the computer be based on either A, like calculating machines, like catch registers and looms and other things like that, or should it be based on a model of the human brain? And they actually had this idea of computers model on the human brain back then. And this is this concept of so-called neural networks. And it's actually fairly astonishing from a research standpoint. The original paper on neural networks actually was published in 1943. So they didn't have our level of neuroscience, but they actually knew about the neuron. And they actually had a theory of neurons interconnecting in synapses and information processing in the brain, even back then. And a lot of people's time basically said, we should basically have the computer from the start-by-model after the human brain. Because if the computer could do everything that the human brain can do, that would be the best possible general purpose computer. And then you could have it do jobs, and you could have it create art, and you could have it do all kinds of things like humans can do. It turns out that didn't happen in our world. What happened instead was the industry went in the other direction it went, basically in the model of the calculating machine or the cash register. And I think practically speaking, that kind of had to be the case, because that was actually the technology that was practical at the time. But that's the path. And so we all have experiences with, up to an including the iPhone in our pocket, its computer is built on that, basically calculating machine model, not the human brain model. And so what that means is, computers as we have come to understand them, they're basically like mathematical savants at best. So they're really good at doing lots of mathematical calculations. They're really good at executing these extremely detailed computer programs. They're hyper literal. One of the things you learn early when you're a programmer is as a programmer, as the human programmer, you have to get every single instruction you give the computer correct, because it will do exactly what you tell it to do. And bugs in computer programs are always a mistake on the part of the programmer. Interesting. You never blame the computer. You always blame the programmer, because that's the nature of the thing that you're dealing with. One down score off and the whole thing. Yeah, and it's a programmer's fault. And if you talk to any programmer, they'll agree with this. It'll be like, yeah, if there's a problem, it's my fault. I can't blame the computer. The computer has no judgment. It has no ability to interpret, synthesize, develop an independent understanding of anything. It's just literally just doing what I tell it to do, step by step. So for 80 years, we've had this just, this very kind of hyper literal kind of model computers. These are called, technically, these are what are called by noiman machines, based after the mathematician John Wannoyman. They run in that way. And they've been very successful and very important, and our world has been shaped by them. But there was always this other idea out there, which is, OK, how about a completely different approach, which is based much more on how the human brain operates, or at least our best understanding of how the human brain operates, those aren't the same thing. It basically says, OK, what if you could have a computer and should it be hyper literal? What if you could have it actually be conceptual? And creative and able to synthesize information, and able to draw judgments, and able to behave in ways that are not deterministic, but are rather creative. And the applications for this, of course, are endless. And so for example, the self-driving car, the only way that you can make a, you cannot program a computer with rules to make it a self-driving car. You have to do what Tesla and Waymo and these other companies have done now. You have to use AI. You have to use this other architecture. And you have to basically teach them how to recognize objects and images at high speeds, the same way, basically, the same way the human brain does. And so those are so-called neural networks running inside. So essentially, let the machine operate based on priors. We almost clipped a boulder going up this particular drive. And so therefore, this shape that previously the machine didn't recognize as a boulder, and now introduces to its catalog of boulders. Is that so? Yeah, we've got a good example. Or let's even start her for self-driving car. There's something in the road. Is it a small child or a plastic shopping bag being blown by the wind? Very important difference. If it's a shopping bag, you definitely want to go straight through it. Because if you deviate, of course, you might, you're going to make a fast, it's the same challenge we have when we're driving. You don't want to swerve to avoid a shopping bag because you might have something that you didn't see on the side. If it's a small child, for sure, you want to swerve. And so, but it's very, but in that moment, and a small children come in different like shapes and descriptions and are wearing different kinds of clothes. They might tumble onto the road this in a way a bag would tumble. Yeah, they might look like they're tumbling. And by the way, they might not be wearing a Halloween mask. They might not have a recognizable human face. It might be a kid with one leg. You definitely want to not hit those. So you can't, this is what basically we figured out is, you can't apply the rules-based approach of a human machine to basically real life and expect the computer to be in any way understanding or resilient to change to basically things happening real life. And this is why there's always been such a stark divide between what the machine can do and what the human can do. And so basically what's happened is in the last decade, that second type of computer, the neural network base computer, has started to actually work. It started to work actually first, interestingly, in vision, recognizing objects and images, which is why the self-driving car is starting to work. Face recognition. Face recognition. When I was started off in visual neuroscience, which is really my original home in neuroscience, the idea that a computer or a camera could do face recognition better than a human was like a very low probability event based on the technology we had at the time, based on the understanding of the face recognition cells and the fusiform gyros. Now you would be smartest to put all your money on the machine. Yeah, you want to find faces and airports, even with masks on and at profile versus straight on. Machines can do it far better than most all people. I mean, they're the super recognizers, but even they can't match the best machines. Now, 10 years ago, what I just said was the exact reverse. That's right. So face is handwriting. And then voice being able to understand voice. Like if you just as a user, if you use Google Docs, it has a built-in voice transcription. They have sort of the best industry leading voice transcription. If you use the voice transcription in Google Docs, it's breathtakingly good. You just speak into it and it just types what you're saying. Well, that's good, because in my phone, everyone's in the wall. I'll say I need to go pick up a few things, and I'll say I need to pick up a few phones. And so Apple needs to get on board. Whatever the voice recognition is that Google's using. Maybe it knows you better than you think. That was not the topic I was avoiding discussing. No, so that's on the list, right? That's on your list. So look, there's actually a reason actually why Google's so good. And Apple is not right now at that kind of thing. And it actually goes to actually the, it's actually a ideological thing of all things. Apple does not permit pooling of data for any purpose, including training AI, whereas Google does. And Apple is just like stake their brand on privacy. And among that is sort of a pledge that they don't like pooling your data. And so all of Apple's AI is like AI that has to happen locally on your phone. Whereas Google's AI can happen in the cloud. Right? It can happen across pool data. Now, by the way, some people think that that's bad, because they think pooling data is bad. But that's an example of the shift that's happening in the industry right now, which is you have this separation between the people who are embracing the new way of training AI's and the people who basically for whatever reason or not. Excuse me. You say that some people think it's bad because of privacy issues. Or they think it's bad because of a reduced functionality of that AI. Oh no. So you're definitely going to get. So there's three reasons AI has started to work. One of them is just simply larger datasets, larger amounts of data. So specifically, the reason why objects and images are now, the reason machines are now better than humans at recognizing objects and images are recognizing faces is because modern facial recognition AI's are trained across all photos on the internet of people. Billions and billions and billions of photos, right? And a limited number of photos of people on the internet attempts to train facial recognition systems 10 or 20 years ago. They'd be trained on thousands or tens of thousands of photos. So the input data is simply much more bad. Much larger. And this is the reason to get to the conclusion on this. This is the reason why chat GPD work so well as chat GPD. One of the reasons chat GPD work so well is it's trained on the entire internet of text. And the entire internet of text was not something that was available for you to train an AI on until it came to actually exist itself, which was new in the last, basically, decade. So in the case of face recognition, I can see how having a much larger input data set would be beneficial if the goal is to recognize mark injuries in face because you are looking for signal to noise against everything else, right? But in the case of chat GPD, when you're pooling all text on the internet and you ask chat GPD to say, construct a paragraph about a mark injury since prediction of the future of human beings over the next 10 years and the likely to be most successful industries. Chat GPD that. If it's pooling across all text, how does it know what is authentically mark injury since text? Because in the case of face recognition, you've got a standard to work from, a verified image versus everything else. In the case of text, you have to make sure that what you're starting with is a verified text from your mouth. So which makes sense if it's coming from video, but then if that video is deepfaked, all of a sudden, what's true, your valid mark injury is of question. And then everything chat GPD is producing that is then of question. So I would say there's a before and after thing here. There's a before, there's like a before chat GPD and after GPD question. Because the existence of GPD itself changes the answer. So before chat GPD, so the reason the version of reason today is trained on data up till September 2021, is with their cut off of their training, they're the training set up till September 2021, almost all text on the internet was written by a human being. And then most of that was written by people under their own names. Some of it wasn't, but a lot of it was. And why do you know this from me is because it was published in a magazine under my name or it's a podcast transcript and it's under my name. And generally speaking, if you just did a search on like, what are things Mark Andreessen has written and said, 90 plus percent of that would be correct. And somebody might have written a fake parody article or something like that, but not that many people were spending that much time writing fake articles about things that I said. So many people can pretend to be you. Exactly, right. And so generally speaking, you can kind of get your arms around the idea that there's a corpus of material associated with me or by the way, same thing with you. There's a corpus of YouTube transcripts and other your academic papers and talks you've given. And you can kind of get your hands around that. And that's how these systems are trained. They take all that data collectively, they put it in there. And that's why it works as well as it does. And that's why if you ask JetGPT to speak or write like me or like you or like somebody else, it will actually generally do a really good job because it has all of our prior text and it's training data. That's it from here on out. This gets harder. And of course, the reason this gets harder is because now we have AI that can create text. We have AI that can create text and industrial scale. Is it watermarked as AI generating text? No, no, no, no. Now how hard would it be to do that? I think it's impossible. I think it's impossible. There are people who are trying to do that. This is a hot topic in the classroom. I was talking to friend who's got like a 14 year old kid in a class and there's like these recurring scandals. Like every kid in the class is using JetGPT to write their essays or to help them write their essays. And then the teacher is using one of there's a tool that you can use that it purports to be able to tell you whether something was written by JetGPT, but it's like only right, like 60% of the time. And so there was this case where the student wrote an essay where their parents sat and watched them write the essay. And then they submitted it. And this tool got the conclusion incorrect. And then the student feels outraged because he got unfairly cheated. But the teacher is like, well, you're all using the tool. Then it turns out there's another tool that basically you feed in text and actually, it's sort of, it's called, they call it a summarizer. What it really is is it's the cheating mechanism to basically just shuffle the words around enough so that it sheds whatever characteristics we're associated with. So there's like an arms race going on in educational settings right now around this exact question. I don't think it's possible to do, there are people working on the watermark. I don't think it's possible to do the watermarking. And I think it's just kind of obvious why it's not possible to do that, which is you can just read the output for yourself. It's really good. How are you actually gonna tell the difference between that and something that a real person wrote? And then by the way, you can also ask JetGPT to write in different styles, right? So you can tell it like, you know, write in the style of a 15 year old, right? You can tell it to write in the style of, you know, a non-native English speaker, right? Or if you're a non-native English speaker, you can tell it to write in the style of an English speaker, a native English speaker, right? And so the tool itself will help you evade. So I don't think that, I think there's a lot of people who are gonna want to distinguish, right? For real versus fake. I think those days are over. Genies out of the bottle. Genies completely out of the bottle. And by the way, I actually think this is good. This doesn't map to, this doesn't map to my world view of how we use this technology anyway, which we can come back to. So there's that. So there's that. And then there's the problem, therefore, of like the so-called deep-take problem. So then there's the problem of like deliberate, basically manipulation. And that's like one of your, one of your many enemies. I know like if you're increasingly one of those enemies. Like mine. Who basically is like, wow, I know how I'm gonna get him, right? I'm gonna create, so I'm gonna use it to create something that looks like a human transcript. And I'm gonna have him say all these bad things. And that's a video. Or a video. I mean, Joe Rogan and I were deep-faked in a video. I don't wanna flag people to it. I won't, so I won't talk about what it was about. But where it, for all the world, look like a conversation that we were having and we never had that specific conversation. Yeah, that's right. So that's gonna happen for sure. And so there's gonna, so what there's gonna need to be is, there's gonna need to be basically registries where basically you, you, like in your case, you will, you will submit your legitimate content into a registry under your unique cryptographic key, right? And then basically there will be a way to check against that registry, to see whether that was the real thing. And I think this needs to be done for, for sure, for public figures, and you've used to be done for politicians, and you've used to be done for music. What about taking what's already out there and being able to authenticate it or not? In the same way that many times per week, I get asked, is this your account about some direct message that somebody got on Instagram? And I always tell them, look, I only have the one account, this one verified account, although now with the advent of paid-of-play verification, makes it a little less potent as a security blanket for knowing if it's not this account, then it's not me. But in any case, these accounts pop up all the time, pretending to be me, and I'm relatively low on the scale, not low, but relatively low on the scale to say like a Beyonce or something like that, who has hundreds of millions of followers. So is there a system in mind where people could go in and verify text? Click yes or no, this is me, this is not me. And even there, there's the opportunity for people to fudge to eliminate things about themselves that they don't want out there by saying, no, that's not me. I didn't actually say that or create that. Yeah, no, that's right. And so technologically, it's actually pretty straightforward. So the way to implement this technologically is what's called public key cryptography, which is the basis for how cryptography information is secured in the world today. And so basically what you would do, the implementation for me, this would be you would like, you would pick whatever is your most trusted channel. Let's say it's your YouTube channel, it's an example where just everybody just knows that it's you on your YouTube channel because you've been doing it for 10 years or whatever, and it's just obvious. And you would just publish like in the About Me page on YouTube, you would just publish your public cryptographic key that's unique to you, right? And then anytime anybody wants to check to see whether any piece of content is actually you, they go to a registry in the cloud somewhere and they basically say, okay, is this him? And then they can basically see whether somebody with your public key, you had actually certified that this was something that you made. Now, who runs that registry is an interesting question. If that registry is run by the government, we will call that the Ministry of Truth. I think that's probably a bad idea. If that registry is run by a company, we would call that basically the equivalent of like a credit bureau or something like that. Maybe that's how it happens. The problem with that is that company now becomes hacking target number one, right? If every person on Earth, right? Because if anybody breaks into that company, they can fake all kinds of things. Yeah, they own the truth. Right, they own the truth, right? And by the way, Insider Threat also their employees can monkey with it, right? So you have to really trust that company. The third way to do it is with a blockchain, right? And so with the crypto blockchain technology, you could have a distributed system, this distributed database in the cloud that is run through a blockchain and then it implements this cryptography in the certification process. What about quantum internet? Is that another way to encrypt these things? I know most of our listeners are probably not familiar with quantum internet, but put simply it's a way to secure communications on the internet. Let's just leave it at that. It's sophisticated and we'll probably do a whole episode about this at some point. But maybe you have a succinct way of describing quantum internet. But that would be better. And if so, please, please offer it up. But is quantum internet going to be one way to secure these kinds of data and resources? Maybe in the future, years in the future. We don't yet have working quantum computers in practice. So it's not currently something you could do, but maybe in a decade or two. Tell me, I'm going to take a stab at defining quantum internet one sentence. It's a way in which, if anyone were to try and peer in on a conversation on the internet, it essentially would be futile because of the way that quantum internet changes the way that the communication is happening so fast in so many times in any one conversation. Essentially changing the translation or the language. So fast that there's just no way to keep up with it. Is that more or less accurate? Yeah, conceivably. Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah. But yeah, somebody. So going back to AI, most people who hear about AI are afraid of AI. And I, well, I think most of us who aren't informed. This goes back to our elite sources, masses thing. Oh, interesting. Well, I heard you say that, you know, and this is from a really wonderful tweet thread that we will link in the show note captions that you put out not long ago and that I've read now several times. And that everyone really should take the time to read. It probably takes about 20 minutes to read it carefully and to think about each piece and it's highly recommend it. But you said, and I'm quoting here, let's address the fifth, the one thing I actually agree with, which is AI will make it easier for bad people to do bad things. So yeah. Yeah. So yes. So first of all, there is a general freak out happening around AI. I think it's primarily, it's one of these again. It's an elite driven freak out. I don't think the man in the street knows cares or feels one way or the other. Because there's not a relevant concept and it probably just sounds like science fiction. So there's, I think there's an elite driven freak out that's happening right now. I think that elite driven freak out has many aspects to it that I think are incorrect. Which is not surprising. I would think that given that I think the elites are incorrect. But a lot of things, but I think they're very wrong about a number of things. They're saying about AI. But that said, look, it's a, this is a very powerful new technology. This is like a new general purpose like thinking technology. So like what if machines could think, right? And what if you could use machines that think and what if you could have them think for you? There's obviously a lot of good that could come from that. But also people, you know, like criminals could use them to plan better, you know, crimes. You know, terrorists could use them to plan better terror attacks and so forth. And so these are going to be tools that bad people can use to do bad things for sure. I can think of some ways that AI could be leveraged to do fantastic things like in the realm of medicine and AI pathologist, perhaps can scan 10,000 slides of histology and find the one micro tumor seller aberration that would turn into a full blown tumor. Whereas the even mildly fatigued or well-rested human pathologists as great as they come. Might miss that. And perhaps the best solution is for both of them to do it. And then for the human to verify what the AI has found and vice versa. That's right. And that's just one example. I mean, I can come up with thousands of examples where this would be wonderful. Well, give me another one by the way, medicine. So you're talking about some analytic result, which is good and important. The other is like the machines are going to be much better bedside manner. They're going to be much better dealing with the patient. And we already know there's already been a study. There's already been a study on that. So there was already a study done on this, where there was a study team that scraped thousands of medical questions off of an internet forum. And then they had real doctors answer the questions. And then they had busy GPT-4 answer the questions. And then they had another panel of doctors score the responses. Right? So there were no patients experienced on here. This was a test contained within the medical world. But the judges, the panel of doctors, or the judges, scored the answers in both facial accuracy and on bedside manner on empathy. And the GPT-4 was equal or better on most of the facial questions analytically already. And it's not even a specifically trained medical AI. But it was overwhelmingly better on empathy. Amazing. And so, and you know, I don't think, yeah, I don't know. Do you treat patients directly? And you're working with the doctor. Yeah, so we run clinical trials. But I don't do any direct clinical trials. So I know Dr. Esch experience of this. From the surgeons, I've from like, if you talk to surgeons, or you talk to people who train surgeons, what they'll tell you is, like surgeons need to have an emotional remove from their patients in order to do a good job with the surgery, the side effect of that. And then by the way, look, it's a hell of a job to have to go in and tell somebody that they're gonna die right? Or that they have. So you're never gonna recover. They're never gonna walk again or whatever it is. And so there's sort of something inherent in that job where they need to keep an emotional reserve from the patient to be able to do the job. And it's expected that them has professionals. The machine has no such limitation. Like the machine could be as sympathetic as you want it to be. For as long as you want it to be, it can be infinitely sympathetic. It's happy to talk to you and for in the morning. It's happy to sympathize with you. And by the way, it's not just sympathizing you in the way that, oh, it's just like, you know, it's just making up words to why do you to make you feel good. It can also sympathize with you in terms of helping you through all the things that you can actually do to improve your situation, right? And so, you know, boy, like if you'd be, you know, can you keep a patient actually on track with a physical therapy program? Can you keep a patient on track with a nutritional program? Can you keep a patient off of drugs or alcohol, right? And if they have a machine medical companion that's with them all the time, that they're talking to all the time, it's infinitely patient, infinitely wise, right? Infinitely loving, right? And it's just going to be there all the time. And it's going to be encouraging. And it's going to be saying, you know, you did such a great job yesterday. I know you can do this again today. Coagative behavioral therapy is an obvious fit here. These things are going to be great at CBT. And that's already starting. But you can already use the CHGPT as a CBT therapist. If you want, it's actually quite good at it. And so there's a universe here that's, it goes to what you said. There's a universe here that's opening up, which is what I believe is it's partnership between man and machine, right? It's a symbiotic relationship, not an adversarial relationship. And so the doctor is going to pair with AI to do all the things that you described. But the patient is also going to pair with AI. And I think this partnership that's going to emerge is going to lead, among other things, to actually much better health outcomes. I've relied for so much of my life on excellent mentors. From a very young age and still now, in order to make best decisions possible with the information I had it. And rarely where they available it for in the morning, sometimes. But not on a frequent basis. And they fatigue like anybody else. And they have their own stuff like anybody else, baggage events in their life, et cetera. What you're describing is sort of AI coach or a therapist of sorts that hopefully would learn to identify our best self and encourage us to be our best self. And when I say best self, I don't mean that in any kind of pop psychology way. I mean, I could imagine AI very easily knowing, how well I slept the night before. And what types of good or bad decisions I tend to make it to a clock in the afternoon when I've only had five hours of sleep, or maybe just less REM sleep the night before. I might encourage me to take a little more time to think about something. It might give me a little tap on the wrist through a device that no one else would detect to. Refrain from something. Never gonna judge you. It's never gonna be resentful. It's never gonna be upset that you didn't listen to it. It's never gonna go on vacation. It's gonna be there for you. I think this is the way people are going to live. It's gonna start with kids and then over time it's gonna be at all. The way people are gonna live is they're gonna have a exactly friend, therapist, companion, mentor, coach, teacher, assistant. And that, that, that, or by the way, maybe multiple of those. Maybe that we're actually talking about six different personas interacting, which is the whole other possibility. But they're gonna have a committee. A committee, yeah, yeah, yeah. A committee. Yeah, exactly. I should have different personas. And maybe by the way, when there are difficult decisions to be made in your life, maybe what you wanna hear is the argument among the different personas. And so you're just gonna grow up. You're just gonna have this in your life. And you're gonna always be able to talk to it and always be able to learn from it and always be able to help it. And like it's just, it's going to, it's gonna be a symbiotic relationship. It's gonna, I think it's gonna be a much better way to live. I think people are gonna get a lot out of it. What modalities will it include? So I can imagine my phone has this engine in it, this AI companion. And I'm listening in headphones as I walk into work. And it's giving me some, not just encouragement, some warning, some thoughts that things that I might ask Mark and Dreson today that I might not have thought of. And so on. I could also imagine it having a more human form. I could imagine it being tactile, having some haptic, so tapping to remind me so that it's not gonna enter our conversation in a way that interferes or distracts you. But I would be aware, oh right. Things of that sort, I mean, how many different modalities are we going to allow these AI coaches to approach us with? And is anyone actually thinking about the hardware piece right now? Because I'm hearing a lot about the software piece. What does the hardware piece look like? Yeah, so the entrepreneur, this is where Silicon Valley is gonna kick in. So the entrepreneurial community is gonna try all of those. Right? And by the way, the big companies and startups are gonna try all those. And so there's obviously there's big companies that are working, the big companies that are talking about a variety of these, including heads up displays, ARVR, kinds of things. There's lots of people doing voice, the voice thing is a real possibility. It may just be an ear piece. There's a new startup that just unveiled a new thing where it's actually project. So you'll have like a pendant, you wear on like a necklace and it actually projects, like literally, like project images like on your hand, or like on the table or on the wall in front of you. So like maybe that's how it shows up. Yeah, there are people working on so called haptic or touch-based kinds of things. There are people working on actually picking up nerve signals like out of your arm, right? To be able to be able to do, there's people, there's, you know, there's some science for being able to do basically like sub-vocalization. So maybe you could pick up that way, build a conduction, you know. So yeah, these are all going to be tried. So that's one question is the physical form of it. And then the other question is the software version of it, which is like, okay, what's the level of abstraction that you want to deal with these things in? Like right now it's like a question answer a paradigm in a sub-vocal chatbot, like I asked a question, get an answer, ask a question, get an answer. But what you want that to go for sure to more of a fluid conversation, you want it to build up more knowledge of who you are and you don't want to have to explain yourself the second time and so forth. And then you want to be able to tell it things like, well, remind me this, that, or you know, be sure and tell me when, acts. But then maybe over time, more and more, you want it actually deciding when it's going to talk to you, right? And when it thinks it has something to say, it says it and otherwise it stays silent. And normally, at least in my head, unless I make a concerted effort to do otherwise, I don't think in complete sentences. So presumably these AI, these machines could learn my style of fragmented internal dialogue. And maybe I have an earpiece and I'm walking in and I start hearing something. But it's some, you know, advice, et cetera, encouragement, discouragement. But at some point, those sounds that I hear in an earphone are very different than seeing something or hearing something in the room. We know this based on the neuroscience of musical perception and language perception. Hearing something in your head is very different. And I could imagine at some point that the AI will cross-apprecipice where if it has inline wiring to actually control neural activity in specific brain areas, and I don't mean very precisely, even just stimulating a little more prefrontal cortical activity for instance, through the earpiece. You know, a little ultrasound wave now can stimulate prefrontal cortex in a non-invasive way. That's being used clinically and experimentally. That the AI could decide that I need to be a little bit more context aware, right? This is something that is very beneficial for those listening that are trying to figure out how to navigate through life. It's like, you know, know the context you're in and know the catalog of behaviors and words that are appropriate for that situation and not others. And, you know, this would go along with agreeableness, perhaps. But strategic agreeableness, right? Context is important. There's nothing diabolical about that. Context is important. But I could imagine the AI recognizing, ah, we're entering a particular environment. I'm now actually going to ramp up activity and prefrontal cortex a little bit in a certain way that allows you to be more situationally aware of yourself and others, which is great unless I can't necessarily short circuit that influence. Because, you know, at some point the AI is actually then controlling my brain activity and my decision making and my speech. I think that's what people fear is that once we cross that precipice, that we are giving up control to the artificial versions of our human intelligence. And look, I think we have to decide. We collectively and we as individuals, I think have to decide exactly how to do that. And this is the big thing that I believe about AI. It's just a much more, I would say, practical view of the world than a lot of the panic that you hear is just like these are machines. They're able to do things that increasingly are like the things that people can do in some circumstances. But these are machines. We build the machines. We decide how to use the machines. When we want the machines turned on, they're turned on. We want them turned off, they're turned off. And so, yeah, so I think that's absolutely the kind of thing that the individual person should always be in charge of. I mean, everyone was and I have to imagine some people are still afraid of crisper, of gene editing. But gene editing stands to revolutionize our treatment of all sorts of diseases. You know, inserting and deleting particular genes in adulthood, right? Not having to recombine in the womb a new organism is an immensely powerful tool. And yet the Chinese scientist who did crisper on humans, this has been done, actually did his postdoc at Stanford Westie Quake, then went to China, did crisper on babies mutated. Something I believe it was the HIV, one of the HIV receptors. I'm told it was with the intention of augmenting human memory. It had very little to do in fact with limiting susceptibility to HIV per se, to do it the way that that receptor is involved in human memory. The world demonized that person. We actually don't know what happened to them, whether or not they have a laboratory now or they're sitting in jail. It's unclear. But in China and elsewhere, people are doing crisper on humans. We know this. It's not legal in the US and other countries. But it's happening. Do you think it's a mistake for us to fear these technologies so much that we back away from them and end up 10 and 20 years behind other countries that could use it for both benevolent or levelant reasons? Yeah, so there's always, and you know, the details matter. So it's technology by technology. But I would say there's two things. You always have to think in these questions, I think in terms of counterfactuals and opportunity cost. And so crisper is an interesting one. And crisper human epilates the human genome. Nature may place the human genome. You can't do that. Like, you know, all kinds of ways. Yeah, when you pick a spouse and you have a child with that spouse, you're doing genetic recombination. You are really. Yes, yeah. You are quite possibly, if you're gang is con, you're determining the future of humanity, right? By those, like, like, yeah, nature, I mean, look, mutations, like, so this is the old question of like, basically, you know, this is all state of nature, state of grace, like, you know, basically is nature good and then therefore artificial things are bad, you know, which is kind of shot. A lot of people have like ethical views like that. I'm always at the view that like, nature's a bitch and wants us dead. Like nature's out to get us, man. Like nature wants to kill us, right? Like nature wants to like involve all kinds of like horrible viruses. Nature wants to, you know, like nature wants to like do, you know, whether, you know, like nature, nature wants to do all kinds of stuff. I mean, look, the original nature religion was the original religion, right? Like that was the original thing people worshipped. And the reason was because nature was the thing that was out to get you, right, before you had scientific and technological methods to be able to be able to deal with it. So, so the idea of not doing these things to me is just saying, oh, we're just going to turn over the future of everything to nature. And I don't think that that there's no reason to believe that that leads in a particularly good direction or bad, you know, that that that's not a value, initial decision. And then the related thing that comes from that is this always this question around what's called the precautionary principle, which shows up in all these conversations on things like CRISPR, which basically is this, it's this principle that basically says the inventors of a new technology should be required to prove that it will not have negative effects before they roll it out. This, of course, is a very new idea. This is actually a new idea in the 1970s. It's actually invented by the German Greens in the 1970s. Before that, people didn't think in those terms. People just invented things and rolled them out. And we got all of modern civilization by people inventing things and rolling them out. The German Greens came up with the precautionary principle for one specific purpose. I'll bet you can guess what it is. It was to prevent famine, nuclear power. It was to shut down attempts to do civilian nuclear power. And if you fast forward 50 years later, you're like, wow, that was a big mistake, right? So with what they said at the time was you have to prove that nuclear reactors are not going to melt down and cause all kinds of problems. And of course, as an engineer, can you prove that that will never happen? Like you can't, like you can't rule out like things that might happen in the future. And so that that philosophy was used to stop nuclear power. By the way, not just in Europe, but also in the US and around much of the rest of the world. If you're somebody who's concerned about carbon emissions, of course, this is the worst thing that happened in the last 50 years in terms of energy. We actually have the silver bullet answer to unlimited energy with zero carbon emissions, nuclear power. We choose not to do it. Not only do we choose not to do it, we're actually shutting down the plants that we have now, right? In California, we just shut down, you know, the big plant Germany just shut down their plants. Germany's in the middle of an energy war with Russia, right? That we are informed as existential for the future of Europe. But unless the risk of nuclear power plant meltdown has increased and I have to imagine it's gone the other way. What is the rationale behind shutting down these plants and not expanding? Because nuclear is bad, right? Nuclear is it. Nuclear is nuclear is nuclear. Nuclear has been tagged. It just sounds bad. Yeah. Nuclear. Yeah. Yeah. Go nuclear nuclear. Well, so what happened? We didn't shut down postal offices and you hear it go postal. So what happened was so nuclear technology arrived on planet earth as a weapon, right? So it arrived in the form of the first thing that is in the middle of World War II. The first thing that it was the atomic bomb, they dropped on Japan. And then there were all the debates that followed around nuclear weapons and disarmament. And there's a whole conversation to be had by the way about that. Because there's different views you could have on that. And then it was in the like 50s and 60s where they started to roll out civilian nuclear power. And then there were accidents. There were accidents. There was like, you know, through mile island melted down and, you know, and then Chernobyl, you know, melted down. And so the union and even recently, you know, Fukushima melted down. And so, you know, there have been meltdowns. And so I think it was a combination of it's a weapon. It is sort of Iki. It's a scientist sometimes of the X factor, right? It's sort of it's, you know, it's radioactive, it goes green. And by the way, it becomes, you know, it becomes like a mythical fictional thing. And so you have all these movies of like horrible, you know, supervillains power by light and clear energy and all this, all this stuff. Well, the intro to the Simpsons, right? Is the nuclear power plant and the three-eyed fish and the, you know, all the negative implications of this nuclear power plant run by, at least on the Simpsons idiots. And that is the, you know, the dystopia where people are unaware of just how bad it is. And who owns the nuclear power plant, right? This is like evil, you know, this is like evil capitalist, right? Right? So it's like connected to like, you know, capitalism, right? And so we're blaming Matt Groaning for the demise of a particular. He certainly didn't help. No, he didn't, right? But it's literally this amazing thing where if you're just like thinking, if you're just thinking like, rationally scientifically, you're like, okay, we want to get rid of carbon. This is the obvious way to do it. So, so okay, fun fact. Richard Nixon did two things that really mattered on this. So one is he defined in 1971 something called project independence, which was to create a thousand new state-of-the-art nuclear plants, civilian nuclear plants in the US by 1980 and to get the US completely off of oil. And cut the entire US energy grid over to nuclear power electricity, cut over to electric cars, the whole thing, like detached from carbon. You'll notice that didn't happen. Why did that not happen? Because he also created the EPA and the Nuclear Regulatory Commission, which then prevented that from happening, right? And then nuclear regulatory commission did not authorize a new nuclear plant in the US for 40 years. Why would he hamstring himself like that? You know, he got distracted by, yeah, by watergate and Vietnam. Yeah, I think Ellsberg just died recently, right? The guy who released the Pentagon papers. Yeah, so, you know, it's this complicated. But it's the, yeah, yeah, yeah, exactly. It's this thing. Yeah, he didn't, you know, he left off the shortly thereafter. He didn't have time to, you know, fully figure this out. I don't know whether he would have figured it out or not. You know, look forward, could have figured it out. Carter could have figured it out. Reagan could have figured it out. Any of these guys could have figured it out. It's like the most obvious, knowing what we know today. It's the most obvious thing in the world. The Russia thing is the amazing thing is like Europe is literally funding Russia's invasion of Ukraine by paying them for oil, right? And they can't shut off the oil because they won't cut over to nuclear, right? And then of course, what happens? Okay, so then here's the other kicker of what happens, right? Which is they won't do nuclear, but they want to do renewables, right? It's a sustainable energy. And so what they do is they do solar and wind. Solar and wind are not reliable because it sometimes gets dark out and sometimes the wind doesn't blow. And so then what happens is they fire up the coal plants, right? And so the actual consequence of the precautionary principle for the purpose it was invented is a massive spike in use of coal. That's taking us back over 100 years. Yes, correct. That is the consequence of the precautionary principle. Like that's the consequence of that mentality. And so it's a failure of a principle on its own merits for the thing it was designed for. And then there's a whole movement of people who want to apply it to every new thing. And this is the hot topic on AI right now in Washington, which is like, oh my God, these people have to prove that this can never get used to bad things. Sorry, I'm hung up on this nuclear thing. And I wonder, can it just be renamed? I mean, seriously, I mean, there is something about the naming of things. We know this in biology, right? I mean, you know, Lamarkey and evolution and things like that. These are bad words in biology, but we had a guest on this podcast. So did Rashavi, who's over in Israel, who's shown, you know, inherited traits. But if you talk about his Lamarkey and then it has all sorts of negative implications, but he's his discoveries have important implications for everything from inherited trauma to treatment of disease. I mean, there's all sorts of positives that await us if we are able to reframe our thinking around something that yes, indeed, could be used for evil. But that has enormous potential and that is an agreement with nature, right? This fundamental truth that at least to my knowledge, no one is revising in any significant way anytime soon. So what if it were called something else? It could be a nuclear. It's it's called, you know, sustainable, right? I mean, it's amazing how marketing can shift our perspective of robots, for instance, or anyway, I'm sure you can come up with better examples than I can. But is there a good, solid PR firm working from the nuclear side? Thunberg in. It's great. A Thunberg. So, so Thunberg in Thunberg in like if she got if she was in favor of it. Yeah. Which by the way, she's not. She's dead setting has to. She said that 100%. Yeah. It based on based on. I mean, I mean, in principles, the prevailing, the prevailing ethic in environmentalism, 50 years is that nuclear is evil. Like they won't consider it. There are, by the way, certain environmentalists who disagree with this. And so Stuart Brand is the one that's been the most public and he has impeccable credentials in the space and he wrote the whole earth catalog. He's a whole earth catalog guy. Yeah. And he's written a whole bunch of really interesting books since and he wrote a recent book that goes through in detail. He's like, yes, obviously the correct environmental thing to do is nuclear power. And we should be we should be implementing project independence. We should be building a thousand. We should specifically we should he didn't say this. But this is what I would say. We should hire Charles Koch. We should hire Koch industries. Right. And they should build us a thousand nuclear power plants. Right. And then we should give them the presidential metal freedom for saving the environment. And that would play us independent of our reliance on oil. Yeah. Then we're done with oil. Like we're just think about what happens. We're done with oil, zero emissions. We're done with the Middle East. We're done. We're done. We were not drilling. We're not drilling on American land anymore. We're not drilling on foreign land. Like we have no military entanglements in places where we're drilling. We're not, you know, dispoiling Alaska. We're not nothing. No offshore rigs. So nothing we're done. And you basically just you build state of the art plants engineered properly. You have just completely contained when there's nuclear waste. You just entomb the waste right in concrete. So it just sits there, you know, forever. It's just very small, you know, footprint. You know, kind of thing. And you're just done. And so this is like the, to me, it's like scientifically, technologically, this is just like the most obvious thing in the world. It's a massive tell on the part of the people who claim to be pro environment that they're not in favor of this. And if I were to say, um, tweet that I'm prone to nuclear power because it's the more sustainable form of power. If I hypothetically did that today, um, what would happen to be in this, in the crypto fascist, you know, dirty people, Catholicists, you know, a monster, how near you, I'm unlikely to run that experiment. I was just curious. That was what we call a Gidonkin experiment. It's permanent or a terrible human being. Well, we do that. We were looking for evidence that you're a terrible human being. And now, now we know it. Right. This is a great example of the, I gave Andrew a book on the way in here with this. My favorite new book is the title of it is when reason goes on holiday. Um, and this is a great example of it is the people who are, the people who simultaneously say their environmentalists and say their anti-neutral power, like the positions simply don't reconcile. But that doesn't bother them like at all. So let's be clear. I predict none of this will happen. Amazing. Uh, I need to learn more about one clear power, long cool, long cool, long cool, investing cool. Because you think we're just going to river. It's the energy source of the future. Well, because it can't be solar and wind because they're not reliable. So you need something. And if it's not nuclear, it's going to be either like oil, natural gas or coal. And you're unwilling to say bet on nuclear because you don't think that, um, the sociopolitical, elitist trends that are driving against nuclear are likely to dissipate anytime soon. Not a chance. I can't imagine it would be great if they did, but that, that, that, it's, they are, the, the, the, the powers that be are very locked in on this as a position. And look, they've been saying this for 50 years. And so they'd have to reverse themselves off of that position. They've got 50 years and people really don't like to do that. One thing that's good about this and other podcasts is that young people listen, and they eventually will take over. And by the way, I will say also there are nuclear entrepreneurs. So there are actually a bunch of, there are a bunch of young entrepreneurs who were basically not taking no for an answer. And they're trying to develop it, particularly as people trying to develop new, very small form factor, nuclear power plants with a variety of possible use cases. So, you know, look, maybe, you know, maybe they show up with a better mouse trap than people take a second look, but we'll see. We're just rename it. So my understanding is that you think we should go all in on AI with the constraints that we discover we need in order to reign in safety and things like that. So not unlike social media, not unlike the internet, not unlike what we should have done with nuclear power. And in terms of the near infinite number of ways that AI can be envisioned to harm us, how do you think we should cope with that psychologically? You know, because I can imagine a lot of people listening to this conversation or thinking, okay, that all sounds great, but there are just too many what-ifs that are terrible, right? You know, what if the machines take over? What if, you know, the silly example I gave earlier, but, you know, what if one day I get logged into my, you know, hard-earned bank account and it's all gone? You know, the AI version of myself like ran off with someone else and with all my money, right? Right? My AI coach abandoned me for somebody else after it learned all the stuff that I taught it. It took off with somebody else. Yeah. Stranded, you know, and it has my bank account numbers, like this kind of thing, right? You could really make this scenario horrible. Right. If you kept going. Yeah. Well, we can throw in a benevolent example as well to counter it, but it's kind of fun to think about where the human mind goes. Right. So first, I say we got to separate the real problems and the fake problems. So there's a lot of the size fiction scenarios, I think, are just not real. And the ones that you decided as an example, like it's not what's going to happen. And I can explain why that's not what's going to happen. So there's a set of fake ones. The fake ones are the ones that just aren't, I think, technologically grounded. They're not rational. It's the AI is going to like wake up and decide to kill us all. It's going to, like, yeah, it's going to develop the kind of agency where it's going to steal our money. You know, plenty of our espoused and everything else, our kids. Like that's just, that's not how it works. And then there's also all these concerns, you know, destruction of society concerns. And this is, you know, misinformation, hate speech, deep fakes, like all that stuff, which I don't think is a real, is actually a real problem. And then there's a, but people have a bunch of economic concerns around, you know, what's going to take all the jobs and all of those kinds of things. We could talk about that. I don't think those are those are, I don't think that's actually the thing that happens. But then there are two actual real concerns that I actually do very much agree with. And one of them is what you said, which is bad people doing bad things. And there's, there's a whole set of things to be done inside there. The big one is we should use AI to build defenses against all the bad things. Right. And so for example, there's a concern, AI is going to make it easier for bad people to build pathogens, right, design pathogens in labs, which, you know, bad people bad scientists can do today, but this is going to make it easier, easier to do. Well, obviously we should have the equivalent of an operation warp speed operating, you know, in perpetuity anyway, right. But then we should use AI to build much better biodefenses, right. And we should be using AI today to design like, for example, full spectrum vaccines against every possible form of pathogen. Right. And so, so defensive mechanism hacking, you can use AI to build better defense tools. Right. And so you should, you should have a whole new kind of security suite wrapped around you, wrapped around your data, wrapped around your money where you're, you're having AI, repel attacks, disinformation, hate speech, deep fakes, all that stuff. You should have an AI filter when you use the internet where you know, you shouldn't have to figure out whether it's really me or whether it's, it's a made up thing. You should have an AI assistant that's doing that for you. Oh, yeah. I mean, these, these little banners and cloaks that you see on social media, like this has been deemed misinformation. Right. The, you know, if you're me, you always collect, right. Because you're like, what's behind the scrim. Right. And then, um, or this is a, I don't always look at the, the, this image is, is gruesome type things. Sometimes I just pass on that. But if it's something that, um, seems debatable, of course you look. Well, and you should have it, you should have an AI assistant with you when you're on the internet. And you should be able to tell the AI assistant what you want. Right. So yes, I want the full, I want the full experience to show me everything. Um, I want it from a particular point of view. And I don't want to hear from these other people who I don't like. I, by the way, it's going to be my eight year old is using this. I don't want anything that's going to cause a problem. And I want everything filtered and, and, and AI based filters like that, that you program a controller, going to work much better. Uh, and, and be much more honest and straightforward and clear. And so forth and, than what we have today. So, so, so basically what I want people to do is think every time you think of like a risk of how it can be used, just think of like, okay, we can use it to build a countermeasure. And the great thing about the countermeasures is they can not only offset AI risks. They can offset other risks, right? Because we already live in a world where pathogens are a problem, right? We ought to have better vaccines. Um, anyway, right? We already live in a world where they're cyber hacking and separatarism. They're already living a world where there is bad content on the internet. And we have the ability now to build much better AI-powered tools to deal with all those things. I also love the idea of the AI physicians, um, you know, getting decent healthcare in this country is so difficult. Even for people who have means or insurance, I mean, the number of phone calls and weights that you have to go through to get a referral to see a specialist. I mean, it's absurd. Like, I mean, the process of is absurd. I mean, it makes one partially or frankly ill just to go through the process of having to do all that. I don't know how anyone does it. And Grant, I don't have the highest degree of patience, but I'm pretty patient and it drives me insane, um, to even just get a remedial care. But, um, so I can think of a lot of benevolent uses of AI. And I'm grateful that you're bringing this up and, uh, here and that you've tweeted about it in that thread. Again, we'll refer people to that and that you're thinking about this. I have to imagine that in your role as investor, um, nowadays that you're also thinking about AI, quite often, um, in terms of all these roles. Um, and so does that mean that there are a lot of, uh, young people who are really bullish on AI and are going for it? Yeah. Okay. This is here to stay. Yeah. Okay. Yeah, we have that time. Okay. Unlike CRISPR, which is sort of in this liminal place where biotech companies aren't sure if they should invest or not. In, uh, in CRISPR because it's unclear whether or not the governing bodies are going to allow gene editing. Just like it was unclear, uh, 15 years ago if they were going to allow gene therapy, but now we know they do allow gene therapy and immunotherapy. Right. Okay. So there is a fight now having said that there's a fight. There's a fight happening in Washington right now over exactly what should be legal or not legal. Um, and there's quite a bit of risk. I think attached to that fight right now because there are some people in there that are being if they're telling a very effective story to try to get people either outlaw AI or specifically limited to a small number of big companies, which I think is potentially disastrous. Um, by the way, you also is like super negative, um, you know, the EU has turned super negative. I'm basically all new technology. So they're moving to try to outlaw AI, which if they succeed now, long, yeah, I'm just like flat out don't want it. But that's like saying you're going to outlaw the internet. I don't see how you can stop this trend. I'm frankly they're not a big fan of the internet either. So like they're, I think they regret that the EU has a very, they're especially EU bureaucrats that people run the EU in Brussels have a very negative view on a lot of modernity. But what I'm hearing here, you know, calls to mind things that I've heard people like David Goggan say, which is, you know, there's so many lazy, undisciplined people out there that nowadays it's easier and easier to become exceptional. I've heard him say something to that extent. It almost sounds like there's so many countries that are just backing off of particular technologies because it just sounds bad from the PR perspective. That, you know, it's creating great, low hanging fruit opportunities for people to barge forward and countries to barge forward if they're willing to embrace this stuff. It is, but you remember when you have to have a country that wants to do that. And that does exist in their countries like that. And then the other is, look, they need to be able to withstand the attack from stronger countries that don't want them to do it. Right. So like EU, like EU has, you know, nominal control over like whatever it is, 27 or whatever member countries. So like even if you're like whatever, the Germans get all fired up about whatever like Brussels can still in a lot of cases, just like flat out, basically control them and tell them not to do it. Right. And then the US, let me look, we have, you know, we have a lot of control over a lot of the world. But it sounds like we sit somewhere sort of in between. Like right now, people are developing AI technologies in US companies. Right. So it is happening. Yeah. Today it's happening. But like I said, there's a set of people who are very focused in Washington right now about trying to either ban it outright or trying to, as I said, limited to a small number of big companies. And then look, China's got a whole, the bread in this is China's got a whole different kind of take on this. Right. Then we do. And so they're of course going to allow it for sure, but they're going to allow it in the ways that their system wants it to happen. Right. There's much more population control and implement authoritarianism. And then of course, they are going to spread their technology and their vision of how society should run across the world. So we're back in a Cold War dynamic like we were with the Soviet Union where there are two different systems that have fundamentally different views on on issue concepts like freedom and individual choice and freedom is being so on. And you know, we know where the Chinese stand. We're still figuring out where we stand. And there are a lot of, so I'm having a lot of schizophrenic. I'm having specifically a lot of schizophrenic conversations that people in DC right now where if I talk to them in China, it doesn't come up. They just like hate tech. They hate American tech companies. They hate AI. They hate social media. They hate this. They hate that. They hate crypto. They hate everything. And they just want to like punish and like ban and like they're just like very, very negative. But then if we have a conversation half hour later, we talk about China, then the conversation totally different. Now we need a partnership between the US government and American tech companies to defeat China. It's like the exact opposite discussion. Right. Is that fear or competitiveness on China specifically on on in terms of the US response in Washington. When you know, you bring up these technologies like, you know, I'll lump crisper in there. Things like crisper, nuclear power, AI. And all sounds very cold. Very dystopian to a lot of people. And yet there are all these benevolent uses as we've been talking about. And then you say you raise the issue of China and then it sounds like this big, you know, dark cloud emerging. And then all of a sudden, you know, it's we need to galvanize and and develop these technologies to counter their effort. So is it fear of them or is it competitiveness or both? So without them in the picture, you just have this and basically it's it's it's an old Bedouin was saying is me against my brother me and my brother gets my cousin. Me and my brother my cousin against, you know, the world, right. Like so, so with it's actually it's evolution and action. I think we think about it is there's no external threat. Then the conflict turns inward. And then and then at that point, there's a big fight between specifically tech and then I was to say generally politics. And in my interpretation that fight is it's a fight for status. It's fundamentally a fight for status and for power, which is like if you're in politics, you like this. You like the status quo of how power and status work in our society. You don't want these new technologies to show up and change things because change is bad. Right. Change change threatens your position. It threatens your, you know, the respect that people have for you and your control over over things. And so I think it's primarily a status fight, which we could talk about. But the China thing is just like a straight up geopolitical us versus them, you know, like I said, it's like a cold war scenario. And you know, look 20 years ago, the prevailing view in Washington was we need to be friends with China. Right. And we're going to be trading partners with China. And yes, they're a totalitarian dictatorship. But like if we trade with them over time, they'll become more democratic. In the last five to 10 years has become more and more clear that that's just not true. And now there's a lot of people in both political parties in DC who very much regret that and want to change too much more of a sort of a cold war footing. Are you willing to comment on TikTok and technologies that emerge from China that are in widespread use within the US. Like how much you trust them or don't trust them. I can go on record myself by saying that early on when TikTok was released, we were told the Stanford faculty that we should not and could not have TikTok accounts nor we chat accounts. So there are a lot of really bright Chinese tech entrepreneurs and engineers who are trying to do good things. I'm totally positive about that. So I think many of the people it mean very well. But the Chinese have a specific system and the system is very clear and unambiguous. And the system is everything in China is owned by the party. It's not even owned by the state is owned by the party is owned by the Chinese Communist Party. So the Chinese Communist Party owns everything they control everything. By the way, it's actually illegal to this day. It's illegal for an foreign investor by equity in a Chinese company. There's all these like basically legal machinations that people do to try to do something that's like economic equivalent to that. But it's actually still illegal to do that. The Chinese have no intention the Chinese Communist Party has no intention of letting foreigners own any of China like zero intention of that. And they regularly move to make sure that that doesn't happen. So so so so they own everything they control everything. So I was sorry to interview but people in China can invest in American government. So all the time. Well, they can't subject to US government constraints. There is a there is a US government system that attempts to mediate that called syphias. And they're more and more there are more and more limitations being put on that. But if you can get through that approval process, then legally you can do that. Whereas the same is not true with respect to China. And so so they so they just have a system. And so if you're if you're the CEO of a Chinese company, it's not optional. If you're the CEO of bite down, serve CEO, tensang. It's not option your relationship with the Chinese Communist Party is not optional. It's required. And what's required is you are a unit of the party and you and your company do what the party says. And when the party says we get the access to all user data in America, you say yes. When the party says you change the algorithm to optimize to a certain social result, you say yes. Right. So so it's just it's whatever it's whatever is whatever Xi Jinping and his party cadres decide. And that's what gets implemented. If you're the CEO of a Chinese tech company, there is a political officer assigned to you who has office down the hall. And at any given time, he can come down the hall. He can grab you out of your staff meeting or board meeting and you can take it on the hall and he can make you sit for hours and study Marxism and Xi Jinping thought and quiz you on it and test you on it. And you'd better pass the test. Right. So it's like a straight political control thing. And then by the way, if you get crosswise with them, like, you know. So when we see tech founders getting called up to Congress for, you know, what looks like interrogation, but it's probably pretty light interrogation compared to what happens in other countries. Yeah. It's a state is state power. They just they have this view of top down state power and they view it's that their system and they view that it's necessary for lots of historical and moral reasons that they've defined. And that's how they run. And then they've got a view that says how they want to propagate that vision outside the country. And they have these programs like Belt and Road, right? That basically are intended to propagate kind of their vision worldwide. And so they are who they are. I will say that they don't lie about it. They're very straightforward. They give speeches. They write books. You can buy Xi Jinping speeches. He goes through the whole thing. They have their tech 2025 plan. I put, you know, it's like 10 years ago. It's their whole AI agenda. It's all in there. And is there a goal that, you know, in 200 years, 300 years that China is the superpower controlling everything? How about 20 years, 30 years or two years, three years? Yeah. They got a short horizon. I mean, look, they're they're they're they're I mean, if you're it's like, you know, I don't know. Everybody's a little bit like this. I guess. But yeah, if you're they want to win. Well, the the CRISPR and humans example that I gave earlier was interesting to me because for small and neuroscientist and they could have edited any genes, but they chose to edit the genes involved in the attempt to create super memory babies, which presumably grow into super memory adults. And whether or not they succeeded in that isn't clear. Those babies are alive and presumably by now walking, talking as far as I know, whether or not they have super memories isn't clear. But China is clearly unafraid to augment biology in that way. And I believe that that's inevitable that's going to happen elsewhere. Probably first for the treatment of disease, but at some point I'm assuming people are going to augment biology to make smarter kids. I mean, people not always, but often will select mates based on the traits they would like their children to inherit. So this happens far more frequently than could be deemed bad. Because either that or people are bad because people do this all the time selecting mates that have physical and psychological and cognitive traits that you would like your offspring to have. CRISPR is a more targeted approach, of course. You know, the reason I'm kind of giving this example and examples like it is that I feel like so much of the way that governments and the public reactive technologies is to just take that first glimpse and it just feels scary. You think about the old Apple ad of the you know 1984 ad. I mean, there was one very scary version of the personal computer and computers and robots taking over and everyone like a Tom Tons. And then there was the Apple version where it's all about creativity, love and peace and it had the pseudosycodilic California thing going for it. Again, great marketing seems to convert people's thinking about technology such that what was once viewed as very scary and dangerous and dystopian is like an oasis of opportunity. So why are people so afraid of new technologies? So this is the thing I've tried to understand for a long time because the history is so clear. And the history basically is every new technology is greeted by what's called a moral panic. And so it's basically this like historical freak out of some kind of causes people to basically predict the end of the world and you go back in time and actually this historical sort of effect. It happens even at things now where you just go back and it's ludicrous right and so you mentioned earlier the satanic panic of the 80s and you know the concern around like heavy metal music. Right before that there was like a freak out around comic books you know in the 50s there was a freak out around jazz music in the 20s and 30s you know it's devil music. You know there was a freak out the rival bicycles caused a moral panic in the like 1860s 1870s bicycles bicycles. Yeah so there was this thing at the time so bicycles were the first they were the first very easy to use personal transportation thing that basically let kids travel between towns. You know quickly without any overhead you know you have to take care of a horse just jump the bike and go. And so it was there was a historical panic specifically around at the time young women who for the first time were able to venture outside the confines of the town to maybe go boyfriend another town. And so the magazines at the time ran all these stories on this phenomenon medical phenomenon called bicycle face. And the idea bicycle face was the exertion caused by pedaling a bicycle would cause your face your face would grimace and then if you run the bicycle for too long your face would lock into place. Right and then you would be unattractive and therefore for us unable to then you know get married. Cars there was a moral panic around car red flag laws there are all these laws that created the automobile automobile freak people out. So there are all these laws if in the early days the automobile in a lot of places you had to you would take a ride automobile and automobiles they broke down all the time so it would be you only rich people had automobiles so be you and your mechanic. In the car right for when it broke down and then you had to hire another guy to walk 200 yards in front of the car with the red flag. And he had to wave the red flag and so you could only drive as fast as he could walk as the red flag was to warn people that the that the car was coming and then and then and I think it was Pennsylvania they had the most draconian version which was they were very worried about the car scaring the horses and so there was a lot that said if you saw a horse coming you need to stop the car you have to disassemble the car and you had to hide the pieces of the car behind the nearest hey bail get wait for the horse to go by and then you can put your car back together. So anyways this example is an electric lighting there was a panic around like whether it was going to come like completely ruin you know this is going to completely ruin like the romance of the dark and it was going to cause you know you know a whole new kind of like terrible civilization where everything is always brightly lit. So there's just like all these examples and so it's like okay what on earth is happening that this is always what happens and so I finally found this book that I think has a has a good model for it. A book is called Men Machines and Modern Times and it's written by the SMIT professor like 60 years ago so it predates the internet but it uses a lot of historical samples and what he says basically he says there's there's actually a three-stage response there's a three-stage societal response new technologies it's very predictable he said stage one is basically just denial just ignore like we just like don't pay attention to this nobody takes it seriously we just like there's just a blackout on the whole topic he says stage stage one stage two is rational counter argument so stage two is where you line up all the different reasons why this can't possibly work it can't possibly ever get you know cheaper you know this that you know not fast enough or whatever the thing is and then he says stage three he says is when the name calling begins so he says stage three is like right right so when they failed ignore it and they failed to argue society out of it they move to the name calling right and what's the name calling the name calling is this is evil this is more panic this is evil this is terrible this is awful this is going to destroy everything like don't you understand like you know all this you know this is just like this is this horrifying and you you know the person working on or being reckless and evil and you know all this stuff and you must be stopped and and he said the reason for that is because basically fundamentally what these things are is there a war over status it's a it's a war over status and therefore a war over power and then of course ultimately ultimately money but the status human status is the thing and so and because what he says is what what is the societal impact of a new technology the societal impact of a new technology is it reorder status in the society so the people who are specialists in that technology become high status and the people who are specialists in the previous way of doing things become low status and generally people don't adapt right generally if you're the kind of person who is high status because you're you're you're an evolved adaptation to an existing technology you're probably not the kind of person that's going to enthusiastically try to replant yourself onto a new technology and so this is like every politician who's just like in a complete state of panic about social media like why are they so freaked out about social media because they all know that the whole nature of modern politics has changed the entire battery of techniques that you used to get elected before social media are now obsolete obviously the best new politicians of the future are going to be 100% creations of social media and podcasts and podcast and we're seeing this now as we head towards the next presidential election that podcasts clearly are going to be featured very heavily in that next election because long form content is a whole different landscape so this is exactly this is the road this is so so so Rogan your Rogan's had like what like he's had like Bernie he's had like Tulsi he said like a whole series of our K most recently and that's create a lot of contribution for a lot of centuries but also my understanding I'm sure he's invited everybody I'm sure he I'm sure he'd loved that Biden on I'm sure he'd loved to Trump on I'm sure he'd have to ask him I mean I think that you know every podcaster has their own ethos around who they invite on and why and how so I certainly can't speak for him but but I have to imagine that any opportunities have true long form discourse that would allow people to really understand people's positions on things I have to imagine that he would be in favor of that sort of thing yeah or somebody else right you know some some other top podcast from not only what right and so there's a if my point my exactly I totally agree with you but my point is if you're a politician if you're if you're a legacy politician right you have the option of embracing the new technology you can do it anytime you want right you but you you don't they're not they won't like they won't do it and why won't they do it well okay first of all they want to ignore it right they want to pretend that things aren't changing you know second is they want like to have rational counterarguments for like why the existing campaign system works the way that it does and this and that and the existing media networks and like here's how you like do things and here's how you give speeches and here's the cozy wear in the tie and the thing in the pocket square and like you've got cool sister it's how you succeeded was coming up to that system so you've got all your arguments as to why that won't work anymore and then and then we've now proceeded to the the the name calling face which is now it's evil right now it's evil for somebody to show up in you know on on on a stream god forbid for three hours and actually say what they think right it's gonna destroy society right so it's exactly right it's like it's it's a it's a classic example of this pattern and anyway so Morrison says in the book um basically this is the forever pattern like this will never change this this is one of those things where you can learn about it and still not the entire world can learn about this and still nothing changes because at the end of the day it's not it has it's not the tact that's the question it's the it's the reordering of status um i have a lot of thoughts about the podcast component uh i'll just say this because i want to get back to um the topic of innovation or technology um but on a long form podcast there's no um safe zone you know the person can get up and walk out but if the person interviewing them and certainly Joe is um the best of the very best if not the most skilled podcaster in the in the entire universe at continuing to press people on specific topics when they're you know trying to bobbin weave and wriggle wriggle out he'll just keep you know either drilling or alter the question somewhat in a way that forces them to finally come up with an answer of some sort and i think that probably um puts certain people's cortisol levels through the roof um such that they just would never go on there i think there's another deeper question also or another question along with that which is how many people actually have something to say real substance right like how many people can actually talk in a way that's actually interesting to anybody else for any length of time like how much substance is there really and like a lot of historical politics was to be able to manufacture a facade where you honestly as far as like you can't tell like how deep the thoughts are like even if they have deep thoughts like it's kept it's kept away from you they would certainly never cop to it. It's going to be an interesting next what is it about uh you know 20 months or so um yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah i was gonna say this list of three things denial um you know uh the counterargument and name calling it seems like with AI um it's already just jump to numbers two and three. Yes correct. We're already at two and three and it's kind of leaning three. Yes yeah yeah that's correct. It's unusual just because it had so new technologies that take off they almost always have a prehistory they almost always have a 30 or 40 year history where people tried and failed to get them to work before they took off. AI has an 80 year prehistory so it has a very long one and then it it just it all was sudden started to work dramatically well like seemingly overnight and so it went from basically it as far as most people were concerned it went from it doesn't work at all to it works incredibly well in one step and that almost never happens. And so I actually think that's exactly what's happening. I think it's actually speedrunning this progression just just because if you use mid-journey or you use GPT or any of these things for five minutes you're just like wow like obviously this thing is going to be like the obviously in my life this is going to be the best thing ever like this is amazing there's all these ways that I can use it and then and then therefore immediately you're like oh my god this is going to transform everything therefore step three right straight to the name calling. In the face of all this there are innovators out there maybe they are where they are innovators maybe they are already starting companies or maybe they are just some young or older person who has these five traits in abundance or doesn't but knows somebody who does and is partnering with them in some sort of idea and you have an amazing track record at identifying these people I think in part because you have those same traits yourself. I've heard you say the following the world is a very malleable place if you know what you want and you go for it with maximum energy and drive and passion the world will often reconfigure itself around you much more quickly and easily than you would think that's a remarkable quote because it says at least two things to me one is that you have a very clear understanding of the inner workings of these great innovators we talked a little bit about that earlier these five traits etc but that also you have an intense understanding of the world landscape and the way that we've been talking about it for the last hour or so is that it is a really intense and kind of oppressive landscape you've got countries and organizations and elites and journalists that you know that are trying to not necessarily trying but are suppressing the innovation process I mean that's sort of the picture that I'm getting so it's like we're trying to innovate inside of a vice that's getting progressively tighter and yet this quote argues that it is the the person the boy or girl man or woman who says well you know what that all might be true but my view of the world is the way the world's going to bend or I'm going to create a dent in that vice that allows me to exist the way that I want or you know what I'm actually going to uncurl the vice the other direction and so I'm at once picking up a sort of pessimistic glass half empty view of the world as well as a glass half full view and so tell me about that and and tell if you would could you tell us about that from the perspective of someone listening who is thinking you know I've got an idea and I know it's a really good one because I just know I might not have the confidence of extrinsic reward yet but I just know there's a seed of something what does it take to foster that and how do we foster real innovation in the landscape that we're talking about yeah so part is I think you just I think one of the ways to square it is I think you as the innovator need to be signed up to fight the fight right so and again this is where like the fictional portrayals have started up so I think to take people of course or even scientists or whatever because they the when they're great success stories they get kind of purified after the fact and they made they get made to be like cute and fun and it's like yeah no like if you talk to anybody who actually did any of these things like no it was it was like these these are always just like brutal exercises and just like share willpower and fighting you know fighting fighting forces that are trying to get you so so part of it is you just you have to be signed up to the fight and this kind of goes to the conscientiousness thing we're talking about it we also my partner Ben uses the term courage a lot right which is some combination of like just stubbornness but coupled with like a willingness to take pain and not stop and you know have people think very bad things of you for a long time until it turns out you know you hopefully prove yourself prove yourself correct and so you have people want to do that like it's a it's a cotton these are it's a context sport like it's these aren't easy roads right it's a context sport so you have to be signed up for the fight the advantage that you have as an innovator is the is at the end of the day the truth actually matters and all the arguments in the world classic Victor Hugo quote is there's nothing more powerful in the world than an idea whose time has come right like if if it's real right and this is so just pure substance if the thing is real if the idea is real like if it's a legitimately good scientific discovery and you know about how nature works if it's a new invention if it's a new work of art and if it's real you know then you you you do at the end of the day you have that on your side and all of the people who are fighting you and arguing with you and telling you know they don't have that on their side right it's it's not like they're showing up with some other thing and they're like my thing is better than your thing like that's not the main problem right the main problem is like I have a thing I'm convinced everybody else is telling me it's stupid wrong it should be illegal whatever the thing is but at the end of the day I still have the thing right and so so at the end of the day like yeah the truth really matters the substance really matters if it's real it's real like I give an example it's really hard historically to find an example of a new technology that came into the world that was then pulled back and you know you know we could you know nuclear is maybe it maybe an example of that but even still they're still you know nuclear there are still nuclear plants like running today you know that that still exists you know I say the same thing is scientific like at least I have amazed you this I don't know I don't know any scientific discovery that was made and then people like at I know I know there are science that are not politically correct to talk about today but every scientist knows the truth right like the truth is still the truth I mean even the geneticists in the Soviet Union who were forced to buy in a listencoism like knew the whole time that it was wrong like that I'm completely convinced of yeah they couldn't dilute themselves especially because the basic training that one gets in any field establishes some core truths upon which even the crazy ideas have to rest and if they don't as you pointed out things fall the pieces I would say that even the technologies that did not pan out and in some cases were disastrous but that were great ideas at the beginning are starting to pan out so the example I'll give is that most people are aware of the Elizabeth Holmes Thernos debacle to put it lightly you know analyzing what's in a single drop of blood as a way to analyze hormones and disease the antibodies etc I mean that's a great idea I mean it's a terrific idea as opposed to having a flambatum has come to your house or you have to go in and you get tapped with a you know and then pulling vials and the whole thing there's now a company born out of Stanford that is doing exactly what she sought to do except that at least the court's rule that she fudged the thing and is that's why she's in jail right now but the idea of getting wide array of markers from a single drop of blood is an absolutely spectacular idea the biggest challenge that company is going to confront is the idea that it's just the next Thernos but if they've got the thing and they're not fudging it as it apparently Thernos was I think everything will work out all a Victor Hugo yeah exactly yeah because who wants to go back like when when if they say yes they get to the work if it's real it's going to be out this is the thing the the opponents the opponents they're not bringing their own ideas like they're not bringing their own ideas better than yours like that's not what's happening they're bringing the silence or counterargument right or name calling right well this is why I think people who need to be loved probably stand a reduced chance of success and maybe that's also why having people close to you that do love you and allowing that to be sufficient right can be very beneficial this gets back to the idea of partnership and family around innovators because if you feel filled up by those people local to you you know in your home then you don't need people on the internet saying nice things about you or your ideas because you're good and you can forge forward another question about innovation is the teams that you assemble around you and you've talked before about this sort of small squadron model you know sort David and Goliath examples as well where you know a small group of individuals can create a technology that frankly outdo what a you know a giant like Facebook might be doing or what any other large company might be doing there are a lot of theories as to why that would happen but I know you have some unique theories why do you think small groups can defeat large organizations so the conventional explanation as I think correct and it's just that large organizations have a lot of advantages but they just have a very hard time actually executing anything because of all the overhead so large organizations have combinatorial communication overhead right the number of people who have to be consulted who have to agree on things gets to be staggering the amount of time it takes to schedule the meeting gets to be staggering you know you get these really big companies and they have some issue they're dealing with and it takes like a month to schedule the pre-meeting to like plan for the meeting which is going to happen two months later which is then going to result in a post meeting which will then result in a poor presentation which will design results in a planning off site right so they're like I thought academia was bad but what you're describing is giving me highs Kafka was Kafka was a documentary yeah like this is yeah so it's just like these these are I mean look you'd have these organizations at a hundred thousand people are more like you're in you're more of a nation state than a company and you've got all these competing internal you know it's the better one thing I say before we've got all these internal like at most big companies your internal enemies are like way more dangerous to you than anybody on the outside can you elaborate on that oh yeah yeah you're big competition the big competition at a big company the big competition is sort of for the next promotion right and the enemy for the next promotion is the next executive over in your company like that's your enemy the other the competitor on the outside is like an abstraction like maybe they'll matter someday whatever I got to be that guy inside my own company right and so the internal warfare is at least as intense as the external warfare and so yeah so it's just I mean this is just all the you know it's iron law of all these big big bureaucracies and how they function so if if a big bureaucracy ever does anything productive I think it's like a miracle like it's like a miracle to the point where there should be like a celebration there should be parties there should be like ticker tape parades for like big large organizations that actually do things like that that's great because it's like so it's so rare it doesn't happen very often so anyway so that's the conventional explanation whereas like small small companies small teams you know there's a lot that they can't do because they can't they're not operating at scale they don't have global coverage and you know all these kind of you know they don't have the resources and so forth but at least they can move quickly right they can organize fast they can have it you know if there's an issue today they can have a meeting today they can solve the issue today right and everybody they need to solve the issue is in the room today and so they can just move a lot faster um I think that's part of it but I think there's another deeper thing underneath that that people really don't like to talk about takes us back full circle to where we started which is just the sheer number of people in the world who are capable of doing new things is just a very small set of people um and so you're not going to have a hundred of them in a company or a thousand or ten thousand you're going to have three eight or ten maybe and some of them are flying too close to the Sun seven of them are blowing themselves up right so some of them are so IBM I actually first learned this and I saw my first actual job job was that IBM when it was and when when when IBM was still on top of the world right before it caved in in the early nineties and so when I was there it was four hundred and forty thousand employees which and again if you inflation adjust like today for that same size of business inflation adjusted market size adjusted it would be it's equivalent today of like a two or three million person organization it was like a it was a nation state uh there were six thousand people in my division you know we were next door to another building that had another six thousand people in another division so you just you could work there for years and never meet anybody who didn't work for IBM the first half of every meeting was just IBM or is introducing themselves to each other like it's just mind boggling in the level of complexity but they were so powerful um that they had uh at four years before I got there in 1985 they were 80 percent of the market capitalization of the entire tech industry right so they were at a level of dominance that even you know google our apple today is not even close to right at the time so that's how powerful they were and so they had a system and it worked really well for like 50 years they had a system which was it mostly employees in the company were expected to basically rigid follow rules so they dressed the same they acted the same they did everything out of the playbook you know they were trained very specifically um but they had this category of people they call wild ducks um and this was an idea that the founder Thomas Watson's come up with wild ducks and the wild ducks were they often had the formal title of an IBM fellow and they were the people who could make new things and there were eight of them and they got to break all the rules and they got to invent new products they got to go off and work on something new they didn't have report back um they got to pull people off of other projects to work with them um they got you know budget when they needed it they they reported directly to the CEO they got whatever they needed he supported them in doing it and they were glassbreakers and you know they showed up the one in Austin at the time was this guy Andy Heller and he would show up and you know jeans and cubby boots and you know amongst an ocean of men and you know blue suits white shirts red ties um and put his cubby boots up on the table and it was fine for Andy hella to do that and it was not fine for you to do that right and so they very specifically identified we haven't we haven't we have like a like almost like an aristocratic class within our company that gets to play with different rules now the expectation is they deliver right they their job is to invent the next breakthrough product but we IBM management know that the 6000 person division is not going to invent the next product we know it's going to be crazy Andy Heller and his um in his cubby boots and so I was always like very impressed like and again like ultimately IBM had its issues but like that model worked for 50 years right like worked incredibly well and I think that's basically the model that works um and so it's but it's a paradox right which is like how do you have a large bureaucratic regimented organization whether it's academia or government or business or anything that has all these real followers and and all these people who are jealous of their status and don't want things to change but then still have that spark of creativity I would say mostly it's impossible like mostly it just doesn't happen those people get driven out right and and then tack what happens is those people get driven out because we will fund them these are the people we fund right I was gonna say yeah I these are the you are in the business of finding and funding the wild the wild duck that's exactly right and actually this is actually close the close the loop this is actually I think the simplest explanation for why IBM ultimately caved in and then HP sort of in the 80s also cave you know these I've been in HP kind of where model it there were these incredible monolithic incredible companies for 40 or 50 years and then they kind of both caved in the 80s and 90s and I actually think it was the emergence of venture capital it was the emergence of a parallel funding system where the wild ducks or in HP's case they're they're superstar tonnical people could actually leave and start their own companies and again we goes back to the university discussion we're having is like this is what doesn't exist at the university level this certainly does not exist at the government level and until recently in media it didn't exist until there's this thing that we call podcast exactly right exactly right we just clearly have picked up some some momentum and I would hope that these other wild duck models will will move quickly yeah but the one thing you know right and you know that's like the one thing you know is the people on the other side are going to be mad as hell yeah they're going to well I think their past denial the counter arguments continue yeah the name calling is prolific and calling is fully underway yes well Mark we've covered a lot of topics but as with every time I talk to you I learn oh so very much so I'm so grateful for you taking the time out of your schedule to talk about all of these topics in depth with us you know I'd be remiss if I didn't say that it is clear to me now that you are hyper realistic about the landscape but you are also intensely optimistic about the existence of wild ducks yes and those around them that support them and that are necessary for the implementation of their ideas at some point and that also you have a real rebel inside you so that is oh so welcome on this podcast and it's oh so needed in these times and every time so on behalf of myself and the rest of us here at the podcast and especially the listeners thank you so much thanks for having me thank you for joining me for today's discussion with Mark Andreessen if you're learning from Endor and join this podcast please subscribe to our YouTube channel that's a terrific zero cost way to support us in addition please subscribe to the podcast on both Spotify and Apple and on both Spotify and Apple you can leave us up to a five star review if you have questions for me or comments about the podcast or guests that you'd like me to consider hosting on the Hubertman Lab podcast please put those in the comment section on YouTube I do read all the comments please also check out the sponsors mentioned at the beginning and throughout today's episode that's the best way to support this podcast not on today's podcast but on many previous episodes of the Hubertman Lab podcast we discuss supplements while supplements aren't necessary for everybody many people derive tremendous benefit from them for things like improving sleep hormone support and focus the Hubertman Lab podcast has partnered with momentous supplements if you'd like to access the supplements discussed on the Hubertman Lab podcast you can go to live momentous spelled OUS so it's live momentous dot com slash Hubertman you can also receive 20% off again that's live momentous spelled OUS dot com slash Hubertman if you haven't already subscribed to our neural network newsletter our neural network newsletter is a completely zero cost monthly newsletter that includes summaries of podcast episodes as well as protocols that is short PDFs describing for instance tools to improve sleep tools to improve neuroplasticity we talk about deliberate cold exposure fitness various aspects of mental health again all completely zero cost and to sign up you simply go to Hubertman Lab dot com go over to the menu in the corner scroll down to newsletter and provide your email we do not share your email with anybody if you're not ready following me on social media I am Hubertman Lab on all platforms so that's Instagram Twitter threads LinkedIn and Facebook and at all of those places I talk about science and science related tools some of which overlaps with the content of the Hubertman Lab podcast but much of which is distinct from the content of the Hubertman Lab podcast again it's Hubertman Lab on all social media platforms thank you once again for joining me for today's discussion with Mark Andreessen and last but certainly not least thank you for your interest in science